In the year 1800, a Scottish captain by
the name of Colin Mackenzie
was traveling in the south of India.
Mackenzie was an officer in the British
East India Company,
a trading corporation with a private
army larger than many countries, that in
the last century had come to hold sway
over vast areas of India.
Mackenzie had come to India at the age of
30, and he became so fascinated with the
place that he would never leave.
He was a curious man and an avid
collector of artifacts.
Over his nearly 40 years in India, he
amassed a collection of 1,500 historical
manuscripts written on palm leaves in 13
languages, along with thousands of local
histories and songs, charts, maps, sketches,
and a collection of more than 6,000
coins.
Mackenzie was also himself a skilled map
maker, and he produced the first
authentic geographical map of South
India.
So, we can imagine his excitement as
he was traveling through the rocky
landscape of the Indian state of
Karnataka, when his local guides told him
of the existence
of an enormous ruined city nearby that
had once been the capital of a great and
powerful empire.
These ruins, they told him, were crumbling
and overgrown,
and could be found near the town of
Anagoondy at a small village known as
Hampi,
a place that the Kannada-speaking locals
had come to know by the name Alputtun,
or ‘the ruined city’.
Mackenzie urged them to take him there
at once.
Mackenzie's visit to the ruins is
recorded in a journal he kept at the
time
which has never been published, but which
exists in rough manuscript form in the
British Library.
In his neat, curling, cursive handwriting,
Mackenzie records what it was like to
wander through the overgrown ruins of
this great city as his guides told him
what they could about its history.
South and half-southwest of Anagoondy
are still remaining many great ruins of
the ancient city; palaces, pagodas,
droogs, and fortifications, to which the
people gave the name Alputtun,
or ‘the ruined city’.
The palaces with the grand stables for
elephants and horses are there to be
seen. On the southeast of one palace is
a place called Vasanta Voodom,
formerly the baths of the rajahs.
They say that ancient kings used to
entertain themselves on certain
festivals with throwing saffron-tinged
water on their women in a little square
basin in the center of the building,
surrounded by galleries. Its drain or
conduit, almost ruined, is to be still
seen.
Westward of this bathing place is a line
of basins and cups cut out of the fine,
black stones, and placed on each side of
the water conduit. They say that here was
formerly the king's garden.
Here and there, families of monkeys would
have clambered over these great boulders,
chattering and chasing one another.
Mackenzie climbed up onto the rocky
granite hills nearby, and from there he
sketched the first comprehensive map of
the site.
He wasn't a man given over to poetry, and
he let his maps and sketches do the
talking.
But he does make note of the sights that
he saw as he explored the ruins.
The interior ramparts, apparently
designed to enclose the royal quarter,
comprehending the palaces or Mahals.
Waterworks of the most remarkable sort
are visible.
An eating place, with a number of black
stone slabs laid along a conduit with
dishes in the shape of leaves,
sculptured on a theme. An octangular
baton gallery and fountain in ruins.
An elephant stable of eleven strong
vaulted divisions, each crowned by a
handsome cupola.
An aqueduct on stone pillars, which
brought water from the tank near
Camlapoor to the royal quarter, gardens,
fountains. It appears to have been
destroyed with much industry.
Only a few decades later, in the 1850s,
another East India Company officer, one
Colonel Alexander Greenlaw, would visit
the ruined site with an early camera and
would take some of the most affecting
photographs of the ruins in their
undisturbed condition.
In them, we can see the same crumbling,
magnificently carved edifices that
Mackenzie would have,
overgrown with mosses, growths of cactus-
-like euphorbia and grasses, their ornate
cupolas strangled by vines.
We can see the beautiful bathing houses
spilling over with water weeds, the halls
of long-dead kings now silent and shaded
beneath cracking roofs.
In his journal, Mackenzie describes the
sight of the city now sunken beneath the
earth.
This place is now almost ruined, but its
remains are still very magnificent and
curious.
The houses of the inhabitants are
entirely destroyed, and the ruins now
form high banks and eminences, under
which are buried many great houses whose
terraces are level with or sunk below
the soil.
Many of these we can see in passing
among the inner ruins. South of the
king's palace is a square building, the
top of which is destroyed now.
This being covered with earth and
overgrown with bushes, we could not
penetrate its interior.
These crumbling ruins were the remains
of a city known as Vijayanagara.
As Mackenzie walked between the fallen
pillars,
as he looked down on them from the
hilltop nearby and drew his map,
he was clearly struck by the grandeur
and magnificence of these remains,
and he must have wondered
how such a great society could build all
this, flourish, and then vanish into
nothing.
My name is Paul Cooper, and you're
listening to The Fall of Civilizations
Podcast.
Each episode, I look at a civilization of
the past that rose to glory and then
collapsed into the ashes of history.
I want to ask, what did they have in
common? What led to their fall? And what
did it feel like to be a person alive at
the time
who witnessed the end of their world?
In this episode, I want to look at a
civilization that has all but faded from
memory in many parts of the world.
That's the story of the Vijayanagara
Empire of Southern India.
I want to tell the story of how this
remarkable society
rose up out of an age of conflict and
fragmentation,
how it built one of the largest and most
impressive medieval cities in the world,
and developed an identity that was both
South Indian in nature and global in
outlook. Finally, I want to tell the
story of what happened to bring the
great stone temples of Vijayanagara
crashing down in fire and flame.
The granite terrain that surrounds the
small village of Hampi and the ruins of
Vijayanagara around it is one of the
most distinct and easily recognizable in
the world.
It's a unique and surreal clutter of
enormous rounded boulders teetering in
strange and unlikely balancing acts,
looking a little like pebbles someone
has piled up on a beach.
A later visitor to the ruins, a British
man named AH Longhurst, provides the
following vivid description of the
region's distinctive landscape.
The site of the old city is a strangely
wild place to have been the birthplace
and capital of an empire. The whole of it
is dotted with little barren rocky hills,
and immediately north of it, the wide and
rapid Tungabhadra River hurries along a
boulder-strewn channel down rapids and
through narrow gorges. The hills are of
granite, weathered to every shade of
color from grey to brown, and have hardly
any vegetation on them.
The alternate burning days and chilly
nights of the Deccan climate have seamed
and split in every direction. The huge
masses of solid rock
and the earthquakes of remote ages have
torn from their flanks the enormous
boulders, and have piled these up round
about their sides in the most fantastic
confusion,
or flung them headlong into the valleys
below.
But despite its often precarious
appearance,
this landscape is actually one of the
most ancient and stable surfaces to be
found anywhere in the world.
These vast sheet layers of granite were
formed under the earth's surface between
about three and three-and-a-half billion
years ago during the earliest formation
of the Earth's crust.
Some of these rocks were around during
the emergence of the very first life on
Earth, from the tiniest microbes and
bacteria.
They have stood here and watched that
life emerge from the seas, seen the
dinosaurs rule the earth only to be
wiped out by a visitor from the stars,
then seen the evolution of humans from
small mammals.
While softer rocks have eroded around
them,
these hard granites have remained.
The landmass that they are a part of is
often known as the Indian subcontinent, a
place with one of the most interesting
interplays of geology and climate in the
world.
This is a massive peninsula
jutting out of the south of Asia that
extends south for more than 3,000
kilometers from the Himalayan
mountains.
It's a landmass that encompasses an
enormous variation in landscapes, from
the mountainous cloud forests and
coconut-palmed beaches in the south to
the snowy reaches of the Himalayas in
the north, and the baking Thar Desert in
the northwest.
But generally, India is loosely divided
into two regions usually called North
and South India.
The north is a landscape of expansive,
flat riverlands, grassy plains stretching
off into the distance,
then rising to the foothills of the
Himalayas.
But in the south, the landscape is
dominated by an arid, rocky shelf known
as the Deccan Plateau.
The name Deccan comes from the same root
as the Tamil word ‘thekkanam’ and the
Sanskrit word ‘Dakshina’, which both mean
the province of the south.
This plateau is a sprawling table of
rocky land that covers much of Western,
Central, and Southern India.
It rises from low elevations in the
north up to more than a thousand meters
in the south, wedged between the two
mountain ranges known as the Western and
Eastern Ghats.
The word ‘ghat’ is used in some South
Indian languages to describe stone steps
leading down to a river or lake, and so,
the word is also used for these
mountains since they look down over the
coast.
The Western Ghats are in fact the eroded
remnants of what was once the edge of
this continent.
A hundred million years ago,
India was joined to Africa before
tearing away and beginning a journey of
6,000 kilometers across the ocean,
before colliding with Asia.
Directly after the break from Africa,
it's thought that the west coast of
India would have appeared as a sheer
cliff around a thousand meters high.
Over the next 100 million years, erosion
and weathering would wear down this
cliff into the dramatic series of
mountains that today runs the whole
length of the coast and can soar up to
2,600 meters.
In the south, they are so massive that
they block the clouds that roll in from
the sea
during India's southwest monsoon,
meaning that the land on the west of the
mountains
is a vivid, tropical green, a landscape of
lagoons and mangrove forests,
while the land of the Deccan Plateau
beyond them is relatively dry and arid.
But across this rocky landscape,
a number of great rivers do flow.
They flow down the slope of the land
eastwards, away from the mountains of the
Western Ghats.
Some of these Deccan rivers are the
Godavari, the Krishna, the Kaveri, and the
Tungabhadra,
and they all flow eastwards until they
eventually empty into the Bay of Bengal
on the eastern coast.
So, this is the landscape across
which the great medieval drama of South
India would unfold.
The roots of human civilization in India
are truly ancient.
Analysis of mitochondrial DNA shows that
modern humans began arriving in the
subcontinent between 75,000 to 50,000
years ago, migrating through the Middle
East and Persia from our origins in
Eastern Africa.
Cave paintings dating to around 10,000
years ago have been found in the rock
shelters of Bhimbetka in Central India.
These paintings show men riding horses
and even elephants, suggesting that the
story of humans in this region has been
intertwined with those of animals since
the very beginning.
Around the year
6500 BC, agriculture emerged as people
began to farm winter grasses, barley, and
wheat in Balochistan in modern Pakistan
on the banks of the Indus River.
In the following millennia, these
techniques spread all the way up the
Indus Valley.
From about the year 3000 BC,
large cities began to form in this
region, which today are known by the
names Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa, and which
are estimated to have held as many as
60,000 people.
The cities of the civilization that grew
up in the Indus Valley
were built from baked bricks, and
featured elaborate drainage systems and
water supply systems, along with what may
have been temples and workshops.
Its people used a system of standardized
weights to measure out goods, and in some
cities, large canals and docks have also
been uncovered. There's evidence that the
Indus Valley may have traded by sea with
the civilizations of Mesopotamia, the
Sumerians and Acadians, and Indus Valley
artifacts have been found as far afield
as Oman, Bahrain, and in the south of Iraq.
It's perhaps here that the people of
India first truly harnessed the immense
power of the elephant.
The carved seals of the Indus Valley
seem to provide the earliest evidence of
the organized capturing and training of
elephants
from as early as 6000 BC.
By the time the first surviving texts
were written in India many thousands of
years later, tamed elephants would have
already been a common, everyday sight,
carrying heavy loads for construction,
transporting important people, and
fighting as weapons of war.
The Indus Valley civilization is also
thought to have experimented with
writing, although the extent to which
they did so is a matter for debate.
Archaeologists have uncovered hundreds
of distinct symbols that Indus people
used on stamped seals or small tablets,
ceramic pots, and what may have been
signs hanging over the gates of their
inner citadel.
Most of these inscriptions are tiny,
containing only four to five characters.
The longest ever found on a single
surface is only 17 characters long, and
we can't tell whether this was truly a
written language.
If the Indus Valley symbols really are a
form of writing, the tragedy is that it
has never been decoded.
So, the names of their cities,
the names of their kings, their deeds and
works, the lives of everyday people,
all of it has been lost beneath the
sands of Pakistan,
perhaps forever.
All that we have left are the names that
later people gave to the remains of
these haunting places.
One of their largest cities is known
today as Mohenjo-Daro, which in the
language of Sindhi simply means ‘the
mound of dead men’.
While it's not clear what happened to
cause the downfall of their society, we
do have some idea.
The Indus Valley climate grew
significantly cooler and drier from
about 1800 BC,
linked to a general weakening of the
monsoon at that time,
an event that may have also contributed
to the collapse of Sumerian society in
the valley of Mesopotamia.
The Indus Valley did not use as
extensive irrigation techniques, and so
were more reliant on the annual floods
of the river.
As the floods failed, the capacity of the
river to support the population would
have collapsed.
At this time, a people known as the Arya
are thought to have arrived in the
valley.
It's unclear whether these Aryans came
as settlers or refugees, whether they
were welcomed or met with conflict,
whether they brought new technologies
and language into the valley, or whether
they simply learned them there.
But whatever the case,
this pattern would be repeated countless
times over the coming history.
People would arrive in India from the
lands beyond, mixed with the people
already there, and a new culture would be
born,
a blend of old and new,
foreign and home-grown.
By the year 1300 BC,
the people of the Indus Valley had left
their drought-ridden land and migrated
eastwards, leaving the cities of Harappa,
Mohenjo-Daro, and many others
to crumble into the sands.
They migrated east until they reached a
large, bountiful river
which meandered across an enormous flood
plain,
rich and full of life.
Here on the banks of this river, the
next phase of Indian history would begin.
Although the story of Vijayanagara takes
place in the southern realm of the
Deccan's arid and rocky plateau, it
begins here in the north,
in this flat and rich river plain, and
the river that flows across it is known
as the river Ganges.
This river
is known locally as the Ganga, and
sometimes Ma Ganga, or mother river.
It begins in an icy cave known as Gomukh,
or the mouth of the cow, which yawns open
at the bottom of the great glacier
Gangotri high up in the Himalayas.
Since its formation 50 million years ago,
the enormous weight of the Himalayan
mountain chain has quite literally
weighed down the land around it.
To the south, the ground has been pressed
down so it is now almost at sea level,
and it's across this flat plain that the
Ganges flows for more than two and a
half thousand kilometers, from east to
west, down to the hot mangrove swamps of
the Bay of Bengal, where it finally
empties its silty waters into the sea.
For millennia, this great waterway has
sustained around a tenth of the world's
population with food, water, and fish,
and has provided a highway for people
and trade to pass up and down the river.
On one of the main tributaries of
the Ganges, a smaller river known as the
Yamuna, sits the city of Delhi.
Delhi is one of the oldest cities in the
world.
It has been continually inhabited for
more than 8,000 years.
The soil on the banks of the Yamuna is
rich,
and so, the people here have always
flourished.
It's in this region of northwestern
India, during the period following the
collapse of the Indus Valley
civilization, that the earliest examples
of written texts were laid down in the
ancient northern language of Sanskrit.
These texts began to be written around
three and a half thousand years ago, and
they are known as the Vedas.
Unfortunately for us, many of these early
texts were written on fragile, perishable
substances,
many of them on paper made of the bark
of the Himalayan birch tree, using inks
made of ash.
Some of these texts, remarkably, have
survived from as far back as the third
or fourth centuries, but in most cases
they have been lost. The oldest of these
Sanskrit texts, known as the Rigveda,
was probably transmitted orally from at
least the second millennium BC,
or more than four thousand years ago.
In it is contained a poetic vision of
how written language developed in this
region.
When in giving names,
they first set forth the beginning of
language.
Their most excellent
and spotless secret
was laid bare through
love. When the wise ones formed language
with their mind,
purifying it
like grain with a winnowing fan,
then friends knew friendships,
an auspicious mark placed on their
language.
The publication of these texts had an
enormous impact. For about a thousand
years after 300 BC, the language of
Sanskrit, once spoken only in the north
of India, would spread to eclipse all
others, becoming the common language of
art, science, religion, and poetry, much as
Latin once was in Europe.
It was in this period that the Vedic
religion formed based on the script of
the Vedas,
and from this, after a number of
adaptations and evolutions, would emerge
the religion we know today as Hinduism.
Today, the lands of India are united in a
single, modern nation, but it's perhaps
one of the most diverse nation states on
earth,
and certainly the largest nation to
comprise so many different cultures
within its borders.
The citizens of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka,
Maharashtra, and all the 28 states of
modern India are as different from one
another as the citizens of France,
Germany, and Italy. They vary in their
traditional dress,
diet, ritual observances, and in the 22
official major languages spoken across
the subcontinent.
South of Maharashtra in Central India,
the languages belong to the Dravidian
family, a body of languages found only in
India,
while Maharashtra's Marathi language and
all the major languages of the north,
including the ancient tongue of Sanskrit,
belong to the Indo-European family, of
which English is also a member.
But perhaps the most marked differences
from region to region are in the realm
of religion.
Today, the word Hinduism is applied
clumsily to a whole variety of different
religious traditions that originate in
India and that take the ancient texts of
the Vedas as their starting point.
Many Hindus refer to their religion as
Sanatana Dharma, the eternal way, or the
eternal duty.
But Indian religion was never united
under a central authority, and so, it
gives rise to a great deal of variation.
In very simple terms, Hindus generally
believe in one god named Brahman, who is
refracted into many different aspects,
the way a beam of light refracted
through a glass prism can be shown to
contain many colours.
The ancient text, the Maitri Upanishad,
explains this refracted conception of
god, in which each living being also
contains a spark of this original,
supreme power.
Now, the part of him which belongs to
darkness,
that is called Rudra,
that part of him which belongs to
obscurity,
that is called Brahma.
That part of him which belongs to
goodness,
that is called Vishnu.
He, being one,
becomes three,
becomes eight, becomes eleven, becomes
twelve, becomes infinite,
because he thus came to be,
he is the being.
He moves about, having entered all beings.
He has become the lord of all beings.
That is the soul within and without,
yet
within and without.
Although this one god can manifest in
many different ways, generally most
Hindus predominantly worship one of two
different manifestations;
these are Shiva and Vishnu.
In traditional Hebrew, Christian, and
Islamic conceptions of the world, the
universe is created by god, who acts to
preserve all that is good within it.
He is opposed by Satan or Shaitan, who
acts to destroy and corrupt.
But Hindu conceptions of the universe
are a little different.
In Hinduism, Shiva is both the creator
and the destroyer,
a beautiful and fearsome god who
represents the primal energy of the
universe.
Shiva is often depicted as a dancer,
reflecting the dance of the universe as
it passes from creation to destruction,
as the flowers bloom, blossom, wither, and
then die,
as people pass from childhood to
adulthood, to old age, and then to death,
all of it part of the same cycle, the
same dance that goes on and on into
eternity.
To imagine this way of thinking, we might
consider that creation and destruction
are often not opposed, but a part of the
same process.
A beautiful mushroom might spring out of
the decay of a fallen tree.
The death of a gazelle gives life to the
cheetah,
and the fall of one civilization can
give rise to another.
But the god Vishnu, on the other hand, is
the preserver.
As Shiva's dance of creation and
destruction rolls on, Vishnu is the one
who holds things together, if only for a
time.
Whenever the need arises, he appears on
Earth in human form as great mythical
heroes like Rama and Krishna, as this
stanza in the Bhagavad Gita shows.
Whenever righteousness wanes
and unrighteousness increases, I send
myself forth for the protection of the
good and for the destruction of evil,
and for the establishment of
righteousness.
I come into being age after age.
So, these are some important points to
remember going forward,
that India at this time was home to a
great variety of different sects, orders,
and religious traditions that today we
might group together under the label
Hinduism, but that the people of the time
would have considered to be considerably
different, and between which there often
existed great hostility.
As the people of India had
increasing contact with the people of
the wider world, in the second half of
the first millennium AD,
a new religion would enter the diverse
mix of Indian belief.
That is the religion of Islam.
This new religion would bring both
conquest and
culture. It would form a cultural rift
that would split the Indian subcontinent
in two,
but that would also connect it to the
great capitals of the wider world and
bring a new age of technology and
advancement.
Its influence would bring about a time
of paradoxes, contrasts, and ironies,
and chief among these is that it was the
arrival of Islam that would lead to the
building of perhaps the greatest Hindu
empire to ever arise on the Indian
peninsula,
the empire of Vijayanagara.
The history of Islam in India is long
and complex.
According to traditional claims,
the world's youngest major religion
arrived on the shores of the
subcontinent during the life of the
Prophet Muhammad,
brought by traders who arrived by sea
from the Persian Gulf.
At first, this young religion must
have felt very alien to the people of
India.
While Hindus did not eat beef as a
result of religious reverence of the cow,
Muslims quite happily ate it, but were
forbidden from eating pork. Hindus
generally believe that god appears in
multiple different forms,
while Muslims believed emphatically in
one indivisible god.
While Hindus believed that you could
access god by giving offerings to
statues and idols, Muslims rejected any
depiction of god in sculpture or
painting.
But while Islam arrived through trade in
the south, its arrival in the north of
India would be a much less peaceful
affair.
In the past, the Indian subcontinent has
often been depicted by historians as a
kind of geographical fortress sealed off
on every side by the mountains and the
sea.
But when we look at the history of the
region, the true picture is one of
constant movements of people in and out
of its landmass,
bringing with them their cultures,
cuisines, architectural styles, and
beliefs.
In fact, India was not a fortress at all.
The sea that appears to hem the
continent in on either side was
actually a busy highway connecting India
to the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea on
one side, and Cambodia, Sri Lanka,
Indonesia, and China on the other,
meaning that the port cities of India
were always diverse and booming centres
of trade.
This meant that Indian pepper and
cinnamon even flavored the meals eaten
by Roman senators, and an Indian bronze
figure of the Buddha has been found in a
9th century viking grave on the small
Swedish island of Helgo.
In the northwest of India, the mountains
of Pakistan and Afghanistan were a
formidable boundary, but a number of
routes like the Khyber Pass and Bolan
pass cut through their rugged cliffs in
the region of the Indus River Valley, and
these passes were home to just as
livelier traffic as the seas.
These roads were so well-established
that Alexander the Great was able to
march his large army into the region of
the Punjab in the 4th century BC,
and he would be followed by many other
would-be conquerors down the ages.
While the Himalayas were the most
impenetrable boundary of all, that didn't
stop Indian Buddhism from spreading
across them into Tibet and on to the
rest of Southeast Asia, reaching as far
north as Japan.
In the first millennium AD, powerful
Hindu empires like the Pallavas, the
Pandyas, and the Cholas grew up in India
and spread their influence right across
the continent, so that Hindu gods can be
found carved into temples as far afield
as Indonesia, Malaysia, and Cambodia, and
the language of Sanskrit would become
the language of learning and religion
right across the Asian landmass.
But while these highways generated
enormous opportunities in connecting
India to the world outside, they also
contained great dangers.
Powerful enemies lived in the lands
beyond the mountains.
Some of these enemies were nomadic
armies of horsemen from the wild steps
of Central Asia that could reach truly
astonishing sizes.
These would periodically sweep down
through the Khyber Pass to raid and
pillage
before disappearing back into the wilds.
But other peoples came to conquer.
Within 20 years of the death of the
Prophet Muhammad, Muslim armies had
achieved one of the most spectacular
feats of military campaigning that has
ever been seen in world history.
Once a small and relatively
insignificant regional power, the
Arabic-speaking peoples had emerged onto
the world stage and immediately knocked
out two ancient heavyweights; the
Byzantine and Sassanid Empires.
They then followed the same course
eastward as Alexander the Great, toppling
empire after empire until the Arab
domains stretched across three
continents,
with borders touching China, Europe, and
India.
To the Muslims of the time, this was
clear proof of the divine nature of
their prophet's revelations.
But just as Alexander had found out
nearly a millennium before,
spectacular conquests don't simply
transform overnight into a stable empire.
Just like Alexander's empire, the newly
conquered Arab territories burst like a
bubble and quickly broke off into
separate Muslim kingdoms stretching
across the Middle East and Central Asia.
These were ruled over by sultans,
a word derived from the Arabic word
‘sultah’, or power,
literally meaning ‘the one who has power’.
These new Muslim kingdoms now sat on the
other side of the Indus River,
and for the next 300 years, they would
not make any move to advance into India.
The Hindu kings who ruled North India
would eye them with suspicion, but it
seems they didn't think of them any
differently to any of the other peoples
who had come and gone in these regions.
They referred to them sometimes as Turks
or Turushkas, sometimes as Tajiks,
other times slightly confusedly as
Greeks, but more usually with the word
‘mleccha’,
a word that means something like
barbarian.
To these Muslim kingdoms, the wealthy
lands of the Ganges plain would have
looked like an irresistible target.
At this time in history, India likely had
the most sophisticated economy in the
world,
and unlike Alexander the Great,
the Muslim sultans knew just how large
and wealthy India was.
From the year 1000 on,
increasingly aggressive raids began to
take place, often originating from
warrior kingdoms in the region of
Afghanistan.
These horsemen would ride south down the
Bolan Pass
and raid the lands of India.
But towards the end of the 12th century,
a new and more ambitious group would
arrive in the region, and they would come
to stay.
These were a group of Turkic peoples
known as the Ghurids. The Ghurids
were a dynasty of Iranian origin, but who
currently ruled over the Ghor region of
present-day Afghanistan.
They had long raided the northern lands
of India, riding down from the hills and
burning cities, taking away loot, but in
recent years they had come under Persian
influence and converted to Islam.
Now one Ghurid ruler set his sights
on greater riches than what could be
looted and strapped to a horse.
He was a man known today as Muhammad
Ghuri.
Muhammad Ghuri was born in the year 1149
in the mountainous region of Ghor.
Ghor had been primarily populated by
Buddhists for the last thousand years,
but from the 11th century on, it became
increasingly Muslim and would soon
become a center of learning, home to
Muslim teachers and scholars.
Muhammad Ghuri was a warlord, and he wanted
not just to loot and rob North India
like his ancestors, but to conquer
territory for himself and settle down
there for good.
When the annual monsoon ended in
northern India, Muhammad Ghuri swept down
the Khyber Pass.
With an army powered by strong Afghan
horses and bolstered with a large
contingent of slave soldiers, he quickly
seized territory in the Punjab, a lush,
green land at the foot of the Himalayas.
The chronicler Ferishta, a Persian
scholar who settled in India in the 16th
century, recounts this campaign in sparse
terms.
In the year following, Muhammad Ghuri,
having recruited his forces, marched
towards Peshawar, which in a short time
was brought under subjection.
Muhammad Ghuri now returned to Ghazni,
but in the next year marched towards
Deebul in the province of Sind, and
overran the whole country as far as the
sea coast, returning laden with rich
spoil.
In the borderlands of the Punjab,
Muhammad Ghuri created a Sunni Islamic
kingdom of his own which extended east
of the Indus River, and he began to
expand it.
He tasked his generals with taking more
territory, and in the year 1193, one of
these generals, a military slave,
captured the small regional capital of
Delhi.
After the return of Muhammad Ghuri, his
general took the fort of Merut and the
city of Delhi, and it is owing to this
circumstance
that foreign nations say the empire of
Delhi was founded by a slave,
and making Delhi the seat of his
government, established himself there, and
compelled all the districts around to
acknowledge the faith of Islam.
In doing so, Muhammad Ghuri laid the
foundation for the Muslim kingdom that
for the next 300 years would rule over a
large part of India and establish Muslim
culture there for good.
This was the power that became known as
the sultanate of Delhi.
We know surprisingly little about what
life was like for the everyday people of
India, many of them Hindu, Jain, and
Buddhist
while living under Islamic rule.
People's experiences must have differed
greatly across time and from person to
person.
While many Hindus no doubt greatly
resented their new Muslim rulers, others
simply got on with their lives,
and others still would have seen great
opportunity in the new arrangement, with
many even converting.
The sources are surprisingly thin on any
kind of religious conflict between the
Muslim rulers and their Hindu subjects.
Certainly some Hindu temples were
demolished or turned into mosques,
although many were left standing.
Muslim rulers were often contemptuous
towards the Hindu religion, condemning
what they thought of as the worship of
idols, but Hindu worship was never banned.
For the most part, Muslim rulers were
clearly pragmatic and had no desire to
unnecessarily aggravate their new
subjects.
Pockets of resistance seem to have been
most fierce among tribal peoples living
in remote areas, but in the cities, there
is little evidence of uprisings, and
while the Muslim sultans certainly
portrayed their conquests as religious
missions in their propaganda, it's not
clear that religion was always at the
forefront of their minds.
Much more pressing was the everyday
matters of power and prestige that
occupy the thoughts of most rulers.
Historical sources contain much more
information about the ceaseless
conflicts that took place between Muslim
rulers and other Muslims than any
conflict with their own Hindu citizens.
The resistance that did occur, often
among tribal people, could still be
fierce.
In the year 1206, Muhammad Ghuri, the
conqueror of North India, was campaigning
in the mountainous region of Sind,
crushing a rebellion by the Punjabi hill
tribe known as the Gukkurs.
One night, with exceptional stealth, a
small group of Gukkur warriors snuck into
his camp and dealt their revenge,
as the chronicler Ferishta recalls.
On the second of Shaban, having reached
the village of Rohtuk on the banks of the
Indus, 20 Gukkurs who had lost some of
their relations in the late wars, entered
into a conspiracy against the king's
life.
They found their way up to the tents in
the night.
One of them advanced to the tent door,
but being stopped by a sentry who was
about to seize him, he plunged his dagger
into his breast. The other assassins took
the opportunity of cutting their way
into the king's tent.
He was asleep, with two slaves fanning
him.
These stood petrified with terror when
they beheld the Gukkurs’ enter, who,
without hesitation,
sheathed their daggers in the king's
body,
which was afterwards found to have been
pierced by no fewer than 22 wounds.
Thus fell Sultan Muhammad Ghuri after a
reign of 32 years.
From there, the Muslims’ fortunes
would only get worse.
That same year, far away in the steppes of
Mongolia, a vast federation of nomadic
peoples would unite together and crown
Genghis Khan as the emperor of all the
steppe people of
Mongolia. Genghis Khan would soon unleash
an invasion of China, where anywhere
between 10 to 40 million people may have
been killed.
From there, he would march through Persia
and the Middle East, tearing the heart
out of the Muslim world and burning its
intellectual capitals like Baghdad to
the ground.
In just a few decades, around 10 percent
of the world's population is thought to
have been killed.
Muslim Turks from Pakistan, Afghanistan,
Persia, and beyond would flee the advance
of the Khan's horde in enormous numbers,
and many of them would come to settle in
the newly Muslim kingdoms of North India.
While they had come as conquerors,
Muslims would soon be arriving in great
numbers as desperate refugees.
After the death of Muhammad Ghuri, the
next hundred years saw a succession of
weak rulers, tyrants, and constant
assassinations, as well as repeated
attempts by the armies of the great
Khans of Mongolia
to conquer northern India.
But time and again,
the horse-powered armies of the
sultanate were able to turn them back,
sometimes inflicting massive defeats on
Mongol armies.
It's one of the great ironies of Muslim
rule in India that the sultans of Delhi,
who themselves had arrived as conquerors,
were perhaps the only thing that stopped
the armies of the Khans from riding
south across India and committing the
kinds of atrocities that they inflicted
on the helpless civilian population of
China.
The sultans were able to hold off the
Mongol attacks, and with their armies
well-trained and now exceptionally
experienced, they even strengthened their
hold on North India.
One by one, they swept away the
fragmented Hindu kingdoms that ruled
there, and as the Mongol threat gradually
diminished in the north, they extended
their borders even further to the south.
Under the Khilji Dynasty, whose armies
were led by a eunuch slave general named
Malik Kafur, the armies of the sultanate
crossed the Vindya mountains, the
traditional boundary between north and
South India, conquered lands there, and
forced the kingdoms beyond to pay
tribute.
By the year 1300, the Delhi Sultanate had
established a lasting power that
stretched from the Indus Valley to the
Bay of Bengal, from the foothills of the
Himalayas to the gateway to the arid
plateau of the Deccan.
This power was Sunni Islamic, culturally
a blend of Turkic and Persian, and in its
more stable moments, its rulers dreamed
of expanding ever further into the south
and eventually raising their banner over
the entire subcontinent.
These dreams would finally be realized
by perhaps the most complex and
controversial figure to ever rule over
India, a man named Muhammad bin Tughlaq.
Muhammad bin Tughlaq came to the throne of
the Delhi Sultanate in the year
1325 at the age of 35.
In this year around the world, the
greatest king of the West African
kingdom of Mali, Mansa Musa, completed his
pilgrimage to Mecca, giving out so much
gold on the way that he crashed the
economies of the Middle East.
In the Valley of Mexico, a bedraggled
band of travelers settled down on an
island in the middle of a lake and
founded what would become the great city
of Tenochtitlan.
In the court of Delhi, a new sultan
was crowned amid rumors of treachery,
murder, and betrayal.
Muhammad bin Tughlaq was an enigmatic and
mercurial ruler.
On one hand, he was an intellectual, an
expert in the Quran and Islamic law, who
could speak Persian, Arabic, Turkish, and
Sanskrit,
as well as a famous lover of poetry.
Like all the sultans of Delhi, he was a
Muslim, but was mostly tolerant of other
religions, and was the only sultan
recorded to have taken part in his
people's Hindu festivals.
But he also had a much darker side.
Muhammad bin Tughlaq’s father had come
from humble origins,
the son of a slave and a Hindu mother,
but he had risen to power and founded
the Tughlaq Dynasty.
But then, only five years into his reign,
a freak accident occurred.
The sultan was sitting under a pavilion
with his favorite son and the intended
crown prince,
when without warning, the structure
collapsed, crushing them both to death.
In some sources, the event is attributed
to a bolt of lightning striking the
pavilion.
One scholar of the time named Barani
describes the event in the following
terms.
A thunderbolt from the sky descended
upon the earth, and the roof under which
the sultan was seated fell down,
crushing him and five or six other
persons
so that they died.
But the Moroccan traveler Ibn Batuta, who
visited the Delhi Sultanate during this
time and wrote his account once he was
safely back in his home city of Fez,
gives a different version of the story.
He claims that the pavilion collapse was
planned,
an assassination
orchestrated by the king's younger son
who would go on to take the throne;
Muhammad bin Tughlaq.
The scheme was that whenever the
elephants would tread on one side of it,
the whole building would fall in ruins.
The sultan alighted and his son asked
his permission to parade the elephants
before him.
The elephants were led up from one
direction as was planned,
and when they walked on that side, the
pavilion fell in on the sultan and his
son, Mahmud.
Muhammad bin Tughlaq gave orders to fetch
axes and mattocks in order to dig for them,
but he made a sign to delay, and in
consequence, they were not brought out
until after sunset.
They cleared away the ruins and found
the sultan dead with his back bent over
his son to protect him.
As with many rulers who came to power
through treachery, Muhammad bin Tughlaq
would spend his reign in a state of deep
paranoia, always afraid that someone else
would do the same thing to him.
Throughout his time on the throne, he
would dole out extremely harsh
punishments to those who displeased him.
The traveller Ibn Batuta was shocked by
his harsh treatment of his citizens.
The sultan was far too free in shedding
blood.
He used to punish small faults and great
without respect of persons, whether men
of learning or piety or noble descent.
Every day there are brought to the
audience hall hundreds of people, chained,
pinioned, and fettered,
and those who are for execution are
executed. Those for torture are tortured,
and those for beating are beaten.
The chronicler Ferishta goes even
further.
So little did he hesitate to spill the
blood of god's creatures that one might
have supposed his object was to
exterminate the human species altogether.
No single week passed without his having
put to death one or more of the learned
and holy men who surrounded him, or some
of the secretaries who attended him.
This cruel streak would earn him the
name Muhammad Khuni,
or Muhammad the Bloody.
Intriguingly, Tughlaq was also a passionate
reformer,
and was determined to enact a sweeping
series of modernization policies in the
sultanate,
but each and every one of these was a
disaster.
Perhaps inspired by China, he introduced
the use of copper coins to replace the
old silver ones to make the economy less
vulnerable to fluctuations in the supply
of silver.
But these copper coins were very easy to
counterfeit, and people across the
sultanate began melting down the copper
objects in their homes to turn them into
coins.
The value of the new currency soon
crashed, and the silver coins had to be
re-introduced at enormous cost.
I think it's not unreasonable to assume
that Muhammad bin Tughlaq actually
suffered from some kind of mental
illness.
One report by the Portuguese writer and
traveller, Fernao Nuniz, recounts a
popular story about him.
There are tales of him which do indeed
seem most marvelous of the things that
he did,
as for instance how he made ready an
army because one day in the morning,
while standing dressing at a window
which was closed,
a ray of sun came into his eyes,
and he cried out that he would not rest
until he had killed or vanquished
whomsoever had dared to enter his
apartments while he was dressing.
All his nobles could not dissuade him
from his purpose, even though they told
him it was the sun that had done it,
a thing without which they could not
live,
that it was a celestial thing and was
located in the sky, and that he could
never do any harm to it. With all this, he
made his forces ready, saying that he
must go in search of his enemy.
As he was going along with large
forces raised in the country, so much
dust arose that it obscured the sun.
When he lost sight of it, the captains
told him that he had put to flight him
who he had come to seek.
Content with this, the king returned to
the road, saying that since his enemy had
fled,
he was satisfied.
While some of these stories have the
sound of apocryphal folk tales, it's
clear that the king who inspired them
was indecisive and unstable.
At one point, he apparently raised an
army of a hundred thousand men and
marched it up into the Himalayas, where
it was easily ambushed and cut off by
the Hindu tribes who lived there.
It's recorded that only a single
horseman made it back to Delhi to tell
of the army's fate.
One of the most devastating decisions he
took was to relocate his capital.
He decided that Delhi was too vulnerable
to attack by Mongols and other steppe
peoples, and so, he would move his capital
to the city of Devagiri, more than 1,200
kilometers to the south.
He ordered that every citizen of Delhi
should relocate and make the long
journey by road.
Accounts recall
that thousands died on the way.
The traveller Ibn Batuta arrived in
Delhi around this time,
and remembers finding it a deserted
ghost town.
The sultan ordered all the inhabitants
to quit the city of Delhi, and made a
proclamation stating that should any
person whatsoever be found in any of its
houses or streets, they should receive
punishment.
Upon this, they all went out.
When I entered Delhi, it was almost a
desert.
Batuta relates that during this time,
the king climbed onto the roof of his
palace and saw the city empty, its
streets silent, with no smoke rising from
its chimneys.
Then he sighed and said the following.
Now my heart is satisfied and my
feelings are appeased.
Characteristically for Muhammad bin
Tughlaq, soon after the mass relocation
of Delhi had been completed,
he changed his mind,
and much of the city's population was
forced to march all the way back.
But to the people of the south, the
sultan's failed attempt to move his
capital in their direction can't have
passed without
notice. It must have been clear that the
ambitions of the sultans were now moving
ever closer towards them.
By this time, the power of the Delhi
Sultanate was seemingly
unstoppable.
Its empire continued to grow
even through the 26-year reign of this
temperamental king.
The sultans swallowed up the South
Indian people known as the Kakatiyas and
other surrounding Hindu kingdoms
until the empire's territory reached its
largest extent around the year 1335.
It would now stretch for thousands of
kilometers,
form a belt across India from sea to sea,
and would nearly encompass the entire
peninsula.
But this success was not to last.
The mad sultan Muhammad bin Tughlaq died
in the year 1351
while out on campaign to crush a Turkic
tribe in the mountains of Pakistan.
The exact cause of his death is unknown,
but one scholar of the time reported the
news with the following quip.
The sultan
was rid of the people,
and the people
of the sultan.
But despite his erratic and tyrannical
ruling style, it's clear that something
in the harsh character of Muhammad bin
Tughlaq had been acting to hold the empire
together.
After his death, the sultanate of Delhi
began to disintegrate, and all its newly
conquered lands rose up in rebellion.
Soon, a war of succession tore the Delhi
Sultanate into multiple factions,
with nobles across the empire setting up
their own states and declaring freedom.
The year
1345 is the last year that imperial
coins were minted in South India.
The following years saw the empire
devolve into anarchy and disintegration,
and opportunist enemies waiting behind
the mountains to the north soon got word
of this.
One of those enemies was the Turko
Mongolian warlord and emperor known as
Timur,
the last of the great nomadic conquerors
of the Eurasian steppe.
After hearing of the weakness of the
Delhi Sultanate,
Timur marched his army south to Delhi in
the year 1398, plundering and killing all
the way. When he reached the city, he
utterly sacked it, looted it, and put its
people to the sword.
Estimates for the casualties in this
massacre go as high as 200,000 people.
Timur himself would later write the
following slightly unconvincing account
of the atrocity.
There was likewise an immense loot of
rubies, diamonds, garnets, pearls, and other
gems,
vessels of gold and silver, and brocades
and silks of great value.
Excepting the quarter of the Sayyids, the
scholars, and the other Mussulmans,
the whole city was sacked.
The pen of fate had written down their
destiny for the people of this city.
Although I was desirous of sparing them,
I could not succeed,
for it was the will of god that this
calamity should befall the city.
Timur had no intention of staying in
India.
He simply collected up all the wealth he
could loot, along with countless enslaved
people, particularly skilled artisans, and
returned to his capital of Samarkand in
modern Uzbekistan.
Like the sacking of Rome, Timur's sack of
Delhi tore the heart out of this already
struggling empire.
The dynasties that followed had no
ability to maintain their far-flung
territories, and would now be little more
than local warlords.
The people and lands that had once been
part of the empire were left in a state
of anarchy, chaos, and plague.
It was a time of immense change,
a time of terrible suffering, and for
some, a time of enormous opportunity.
Into this terrain of blood and fire, two
brothers would rise from obscure
upbringings to change the shape of power
in this region,
and it's with these two brothers that
the story of Vijayanagara would truly
begin. They would move the center of
Indian power from the Muslim north to
the Hindu south,
and build a city there that would stand
among the great cities of the medieval
world.
They were known as the Sangama brothers,
and their names were Bukka and Harihara.
The exact origins of the Sangama
brothers are wreathed in mystery.
Many historians believe that Bukka and
Harihara were commanders of the southern
Hoysala Empire.
According to these accounts, they may
have been stationed on the rocky banks
of the Tungabhadra River, with orders to
repel any Muslim incursions from the
north.
Some more dramatic and fanciful stories
recount how the brothers were generals
of the conquered Kakatiyas, captured as
prisoners of war, and taken to Delhi
where they were forced to convert to
Islam, later escaping and converting back
to their native faiths.
But none of this is mentioned in
contemporary sources, meaning that these
accounts are likely unreliable.
Many of these legends suggest that these
brothers met a Hindu sage named Shri
Vidyaranya.
One traditional story recalls that
Harihara was out hunting one day when he
saw a miraculous sight, and the sage
advised him on how to interpret it, as
the historian Robert Sewell recounts.
During his reign,
this chief was one day hunting amongst
the mountains south of the river
when a hare, instead of fleeing from his
dogs, flew at them and bit them.
The king, astonished at this marvel, was
returning homewards, lost in meditation,
when he met on the riverbank the sage
named Vidyaranya or Forest of Learning,
who advised the chief to found a city on
the spot.
So, the king did, and on that very day
began work on his houses, and he enclosed
the city roundabout.
While this is most likely a fable, it
does contain an illuminating image of
how the young power of Vijayanagara
would go on to see itself,
as the hunted rabbit who had turned
around and learned how to bite.
As the power of the Delhi Sultanate
collapsed, the two brothers Bukka and
Harihara
raised a considerable army
made up of angry Hindu lords, but also
large cohorts of Muslim mercenaries.
These may even have been soldiers who
had once fought for the Delhi Sultanate
but who were no longer getting paid.
With this force, the brothers set out to
capture the areas of South India that
the sultanate had left behind.
Their offer to Hindu lords in the region
was clear;
join us, and we will ensure that South
India is run by Hindus,
and it's clear that many found this
offer irresistible.
Within only a few decades, the Sangama
brothers had brought a large part of
South India under their control,
but many areas in the south were still
ruled by Muslim powers,
now cut off and isolated.
These included the arid lands of Tamil
Nadu, India's southernmost state, which
was still ruled by a short-lived Muslim
power continuing to fight for its
existence in South India, known as the
Madurai Sultanate.
At this time, the Sangama brother Bukka
was on the throne, and his wife was a
woman named Ganga Devi, a famed poet.
She wrote one vaulting, epic poem in the
language of Sanskrit entitled Madhura
Vijayam, or The Victory of Madurai.
In it, she describes how a woman from the
holy city of Madurai comes to king
Bukka's court and begs him to take the
town back.
She describes how the ancient Hindu
temples of Madurai had fallen into
disrepair under its Muslim rulers.
White ants have destroyed the doors.
The door frame of the sanctum is broken
due to the wild growth of trees, plants,
and creepers.
The temple premises
that formerly echoed the soft beating of
the drums
are now full of wild, wallowing jackals.
The place once filled with the odor of
sacrificial smoke and the melodious
chant of Vedic mantras
is now full of the foul smell of meat.
The beautiful line of statues that adorn
the tall towers of the beautiful
buildings in the city
are now covered with layers of cobwebs.
Whether truly motivated by these
religious concerns or not, the Sangama
brothers marched south and quickly
conquered the now isolated Madurai
Sultanate.
With the southern Tamil country now
under their control, the Sangama brothers
now ruled over a large and wealthy
territory.
They returned to their former post on
the rocky granite banks of the
Tungabhadra River.
It was an unassuming sight, just a small
and fairly insignificant village
known only for its shrine to Shiva, a
focal point of pilgrimage.
But here, they began to build a city
that would announce in its size and
ambition
the arrival of a new confident power in
the south of India.
They named this city Vijayanagara, from
the Sanskrit ‘vijaya’, meaning victory, and
‘nagara’, meaning city,
the city of victory.
The city that the Sangamas built on the
banks of the Tungabhadra River testified
to the ambitions that they held for
their new kingdom.
It would be a city of soaring temples
and wide avenues built with an
impressive grasp of urban planning, but
the city was also a testament to the
dangerous world that they now found
themselves at the heart of.
They would build Vijayanagara as a
formidable fortress.
The impassible granite hills already
provided excellent defense while the
wide, torrential Tungabhadra River
protected it on the north side, almost
impossible for an army to ford.
The brothers enhanced these natural
defenses by fortifying the passes
between the hills with strong gates and
towers, and these massive walls can still
be traced in the landscape today,
enclosing an area of more than 650
square kilometers.
The Afghan envoy Abdur Razzak, who visited
in the 15th century, wrote the following
description of the city.
It is built in such a manner that seven
citadels and the same number of walls
enclose each other.
The seventh fortress, which is placed in
the center of the other, occupies an area
ten times larger than the marketplace of
the city of Herat.
It is the place which is used as the
residence of the king.
These walls were manned by soldiers who
watched from the ramparts, operating
watch posts on the broad roads that ran
in and out of the city,
and in between the layers of walls were
areas filled with boulders known as
horse stones, designed to disrupt the
movement of cavalry and guarantee that
any attacking army would have a
difficult time advancing while the
soldiers of Vijayanagara rained arrow
fire down on their heads.
When you look at the situation that
surrounded the city and the new empire
of Vijayanagara, it's not hard to see why
these defensive fortifications were
considered necessary.
That's because the collapse of the Delhi
Sultanate had left a number of
fragmented kingdoms behind,
who, like Vijayanagara, rose out of the
chaos of the collapsing empire.
The most powerful of these in South
India was the society known as the
Bahmani Sultanate.
According to tradition, the Bahmani
Sultanate was founded by an army
commander named Zafar Khan, who had
served under the erratic sultan Muhammad
bin Tughlaq.
It's clear that at some point he felt
the waning power of the Delhi Sultanate
in its final years, and in the year 1347,
declared himself an independent king in
South India, seizing a large portion of
the rocky Deccan Plateau for himself.
His gamble paid off;
the weakened Delhi Sultanate, beset with
problems on all sides, was no longer able
to project its power south of the Vindhya
mountains,
and it did nothing to stop him.
This newly independent power had to
fight for its survival from its first
days.
After defeating one local Hindu ruler,
the Bahmani Sultanate received as
tribute a magnificent gift,
an ornate throne decorated with
turquoise enamel that would become a
symbol of their new empire,
as the chronicler Ferishta recalls.
The throne was in length nine feet and
three in breadth, made of ebony covered
with plates of pure gold, and set with
precious stones of immense value.  Every
prince of the House of Bahmani who
possessed this throne made a point of
adding to it some rich stones.
I learned that it was called the
Turquoise Throne from being partly
enameled of a sky colour, which was in
time totally concealed by the number of
jewels.
This would become known as the Turquoise
Throne of the Bahmanis, and it would
become a symbol of Muslim power in the
south of India.
Above this throne, they affixed an
umbrella, which the scholar Ferishta
also gushes about.
He fixed a golden ball set with jewels,
on which was a bird of paradise composed
of precious stones at the top of the
umbrella.
On the bird's head was a ruby
inestimable in value, which had been
presented to the late sultan by the king
of Vijayanagara.
When this first sultan of the Bahmanis
died, with his last words, he declared
that his son Mohammed Shah Bahmani would
take his throne,
and he entreated his sons to stand
united and build a kingdom that would
stand the test of time, as the chronicler
Ferishta writes.
I conjure you, as you value the
performance of this kingdom, to agree
with each other.
Mohammed is my successor.
Esteem submission and loyalty to him as
your duty in this world,
and you’re surely for happiness
in the next.
The Bahmani Sultanate was a powerful
Muslim kingdom in the heart of South
India that would last for the best part
of the next two centuries.
For the Hindu people of Vijayanagara,
it represented a constant looming threat
on their border.
Historians in India and in the West who
subscribed to a nationalist idea of
history have often framed the conflict
between these two medieval kingdoms in
terms of a clash of cultures.
In this conception of history, they
imagine the Hindu kingdom of
Vijayanagara as a bastion defending
Hindu culture from Islamic invaders.
But there's little evidence to be found
that the people or the rulers of
Vijayanagara thought of the situation in
this way.
One inscription from the time of the
Sangama brothers celebrates the
victories of the Vijayanagara king
Bukka Raya,
and in it, we can see that they thought
of the Turkic Bahmani Sultanate as just
one of the many enemies that the kingdom
of Vijayanagara faced.
Its other enemies were all Hindu
kingdoms.
When his sword began to dance on the
battlefield, the faces of the Turks
shriveled up, Konkaya Sankaparya was
filled with fear,
the Andhras ran into caves, the Gurjaras
lost the use of their limbs on every
road,
the Kambojas’ courage was broken, the
Kalingas suffered defeat.
Here, there is no mention of religion, and
neither is there any hint that the
Muslim Bahmanis were any more despicable
to the kings of Vijayanagara than say
the Hindu kings of Kalinga on the east
coast.
There's little evidence that the kings
of Vijayanagara thought of themselves as
defending Hinduism, and indeed, the idea
of a unified Hindu identity simply
didn't exist in the 14th century.
While the two powers did fight long and
bitter wars, the kings of Vijayanagara
fought equally bitter wars with the
Hindu Gajapatis, whose kings ruled over
the humid, elephant-filled forest regions
to the east.
When religious divisions emerged
within the kingdom of Vijayanagara, it
was overwhelmingly between the followers
of Vishnu and Shiva among the Hindus, or
between Hindus and Jains.
In fact, conflicts between the Bahmani
Sultans and Vijayanagara often occurred
due to greatly practical economic
matters,
like access to resources, supply lines,
and trade routes. One bitter issue of
contention was a rich tract of land
between them known as the Raichur Doab.
This was a triangle of land formed at
the point where the rivers Krishna and
Tungabhadra met,
and it was immensely fertile.
But it also held great deposits of iron
and even diamonds. Other conflicts would
break out over the rich river deltas to
the east and the western coast of India,
home to rich trading ports.
These ports controlled traffic by sea
with the Muslim world, and were a crucial
conduit for the most important strategic
military supply of the time; the powerful
war horses imported from Arabia, Persia,
and Central Asia.
With these contentious territorial
issues always on the minds of their
rulers, wars between the Bahmani
Sultanate and Vijayanagara broke out
constantly.
With their connections to the Muslim
world, the Bahmanis had the advantage for
much of this region's history.
Well-supplied with horses, the sultan of
the Bahmanis became known as Ashvapati,
or the Lord of Horses, while the kings of
Vijayanagara were known as or
Narapati, or the Lord of Men,
alluding to their armies made up of
largely massed infantry.
The king of the Hindu Gajapatis in
the east, with their vast stables of
elephants, completed the triangle and
became known as the Lord of Elephants.
The Portuguese visitor Domingo Paes was
suitably impressed by the infantry of
Vijayanagara when he saw them marching in
procession in the year 1520.
The troops on foot are so many that they
surrounded all the valleys and hills in
a way with which nothing in the world
can compare.
At the waist, they have swords and small
battleaxes, and in their hands, javelins
with the shafts covered with gold and
silver. You will see amongst them dresses
of such rich cloths that I do not know
where they came from.
Nor could anyone tell you how many
colors they have;
shield-men with their shields, with many
flowers of gold and silver on them,
others with figures of tigers and other
great beasts,
others
all are covered with silver leaf work,
beautifully wrought.
But in the early days, they were no match
for the horsepower of the Bahmani
Sultanate, and with their connections to
the vibrant intellectual world of Muslim
learning, the Bahmanis also enjoyed a
technological advantage.
One of the first sultans, Mohammed Shah
Bahmani, was a keen follower of new
technologies. He even established
gunpowder factories in the sultanate to
make use of the emerging technology.
Gunpowder had first been introduced to
India and the Middle East by the Mongols,
who had learned about it from the
Chinese.
At this point, it was used mostly to
create burning or exploding projectiles
to be fired from catapults, and
occasionally to create crude rockets.
But soon, experiments would begin in
using it to propel heavy projectiles
along metal tubes, first as siege weapons
and then as weapons on the battlefield.
Soon, the sounds of cannon fire would
ring out over the battlefields of
medieval India, and the Bahmani sultans’
early adoption of this technology would
put them in a strong position in the
coming centuries.
So, although the Hindus of Vijayanagara
were the larger and often wealthier
kingdom, they often found themselves in
the position of paying tribute to their
Muslim neighbours to the north,
whose powerful cavalry armies, soon
backed by the technological might of
cannons, gave them the upper hand.
But these wars were never true wars of
conquest.
The two powers would fight over a
seaport or the rich diamond mines of
Raichur between them, but when the war's
result became clear, the loser would
inevitably sue for peace, agree to pay an
enormous sum of money to the victor,
often hand over one of their daughters
in marriage, and then they would both
return home.
There was never any suggestion that one
side in this rivalry would ever conquer
and consume the other.
Still, the growing power of the
Bahmanis was of growing concern to the
kings of Vijayanagara.
Soon, the Bahmani Sultanate stretched
right across India from east coast to
west, an unbroken belt that walled off
the people of Vijayanagara to the north,
that seized the rich lands of Raichur, and
meant that the Hindus of the south were
forever looking with fearful eyes to
their northern borders.
But despite these concerns, the city of
Vijayanagara grew with astonishing speed.
From the mid-14th century, the capital of
Vijayanagara grew steadily
from the center of a wealthy kingdom
into a great world capital.
Thanks to developments in water
management in the countryside, the
population boomed.
Enormous work teams would have dug new
irrigation systems and reservoirs lined
with stone, as well as distinctive step-
-wells so that its people could draw
water up from the earth.
The city expanded rapidly, sprawling to
absorb villages and towns around it, and
soon grew to house as many as 300,000
people at a time when London had only a
fifth of that population, and when the
largest city in Europe was Paris,
with little more than two hundred
thousand.
By the year 1500,
Vijayanagara was the world's second-
-largest medieval city after Beijing,
and probably India's richest. One poet
alive at the time of the city's
flourishing wrote the following ode to
its beauty.
Walk around the great city of victory.
Go where you will on city streets.
Everywhere you walk, bright assembly
halls decked out with golden vessels
will dazzle your eyes.
On many streets, homes with mirrored
doors will shine, and sugarcane and
plantain all around will invite you with
welcomes.
You'll find able-bodied fighters and
horses,
elephants and riders. You'll smell aromas
of camphor and musk from breasts of
exquisite doe-eyed women.
You will face gardens lush with
enjoyments,
precious stones and glowing gold,
a city of wealth and glory gleaming.
You'll agree that this magnificent city
is the most enchanting place you've ever
seen.
The city also benefited from being
surrounded by a seemingly inexhaustible
amount of exceptional building material
in the form of the large granite
boulders of Hampi's ancient terrain.
Vijayanagara was truly a city of stone,
with all its palaces and stables, its
towers and walls, even the houses of its
citizens carved out of blocks of solid
granite.
An ambassador from the Timurid capital
of Samarkand named Abdur Razzak, working
as an ambassador for the Persian king,
passed through Vijayanagara in the year
1443,
and by this time, the city's skyline had
grown impressive enough for him to give
the following glowing report.
The city of Bidjnagar is such that the
pupil of the eye has never seen a place
like it, and the ear of intelligence has
never been informed
that there existed anything to equal it
in the world.
Vijayanagara would continue to grow.
By the early 16th century, some 50 years
later,
it would be home to as many as half a
million people, and the Portuguese writer
Domingo Paes was stunned to see the
heights it had reached.
The size of the city cannot all be seen
from one spot, but I climbed a hill whence
I could see a great part of it.
I could not see it all because it lies
between several ranges of hills.
What I saw from then seemed to me as
large as Rome
and very beautiful to the sight.
Paes was also impressed by the great
abundance available in the markets of
Vijayanagara.
Going forward, you have a broad and
beautiful street,
full of rows of fine houses and streets
of sorts I've described, and it is
understood that the houses belong to men
rich enough to afford such.
In this city live many merchants,
and there you will find all sorts of
rubies and diamonds and emeralds and
pearls and seed pearls and cloths,
and every other sort of thing there is
on the earth that you may wish to buy.
Vijayanagara was divided into a number
of different districts, each with a
unique character.
Near the river was the area known today
as the Sacred Center,
so called because of the many large
temples that can be found here. Here, the
mighty Virupaksha temple still soars up
to the sky, with its enormous carved gate
tower known as a gopuram.
The streets here would have been full of
the sounds of chanting hymns and the
clanging of temple bells, the smoke of
incense, and the pleas of the faithful
as they came to pray, to be healed, and to
be closer to the gods.
Many of these temples were so large that
for tax purposes, they were classed as
towns in their own right.
These enormous building complexes
supported a huge cast of retainers and
specialists, dancers and labourers, cooks
and cleaners, as well as scholars, holy
men, and artists.
Further south is what's been termed the
urban core, a walled area of around 20
square kilometers that contains both
houses and markets, as well as workshops,
rest houses, and other places of business,
as the historian Atul Chandra Chatterjee
recalls.
The great majority of the houses were
naturally small and undistinguished, but
among them were scattered palaces,
temples, public buildings, wide streets of
shops shaded by trees, busy markets, and
all the equipment of a great and wealthy
city.
Here, the ruined remains of the city
clearly show a great amount of religious
diversity.
Local temples here cater to the Jains, as
well as Hindu temples for both Vishnu
and Shiva followers, and one area with a
mosque.
The Portuguese traveler Duarte Barbosa,
arriving in Vijayanagara around the year
1501, gave the following vivid
description of this district.
The houses are thatched, but are
nonetheless very well-built and arranged
according to occupations in long streets
with many open places,
and the folk here are ever in such
numbers that the streets and places
cannot contain them.
There is a great traffic and an endless
number of merchants and wealthy men.
The king allows such freedom that every
man may come and go according to his
creed, without suffering any annoyance,
and without inquiry whether he is
Christian, Jew, Moor,
or Heathen.
Barbosa also pays particular attention
to the smells that would have wafted
through the air from the markets selling
spices and perfumes.
Here also is used vermilion, saffron, rose
water, a
great store of opium, sandalwood, aloes-
-wood, camphor musk, and scented materials.
Likewise, much pepper is used here, which
they bring from Malabar on donkeys and pack
cattle. Here, we can imagine scenes of family
life;
children running in the streets, wood
smoke billowing overhead.
Men would gather here to play games of
chance and strategy on street corners,
chewing betel nuts and leaves, which are
chewed across India for a mild stimulant
effect.
Women would talk in the shade of
coloured awnings,
cows wondering unhindered among the
crowds,
and groups of musicians playing on the
streets.
It's during this time in the
Vijayanagara Empire that the distinctive
form of Indian classical music known as
Carnatic music was laid down.
We're joined on this episode by the
virtuoso of Carnatic music, Aruna Sairam,
who has recorded a number of authentic
Carnatic pieces especially for this
podcast,
one of which you're listening to now.
We can imagine the sounds of this music
drifting over the streets and rooftops
of Vijayanagara as the business of
everyday life went on.
The day of an average citizen would have
started with a bath in a local
bathhouse.
Men and women had separate bathing
places, which were available at different
times of the day.
After bathing, families would go to their
local temple to give offerings and
receive blessings for the day ahead.
We can see the clothing worn by the
people of Vijayanagara in the colorful
16th century murals that decorate the
walls of temples to Shiva and Vishnu in
the village of Lepakshi.
They show women with strikingly varied
skin tones wearing saris in multiple
ornate patterns drawn from different
regions, with pearls in their hair.
Other murals show noblemen hunting a
boar through the forest, with their
facial hair cut into refined beards,
wearing kilt-like lower garments and
jeweled necklaces.
Turbans and other headdresses were
popular headgear among the rich.
Both men and women wore perfumes made of
sandalwood, rose water, flowers, civet, and
musk.
Shopkeepers in this part of the city and
everywhere else would need to be
constantly alert to the mischief of the
monkeys that still live to this day in
huge numbers in the region of Hampi; the
red-faced rhesus macaques and the
silvery-grey or Hanuman langurs.
Then as now, these animals love nothing
better than to slink along the rooftops
in their troops, drop down from shop
awnings, and steal food from whoever has
let down their guard.
Towering over this bustling residential
district was the royal center.
This was an area of walled enclosures
that guard the large monumental palaces
and mansions that were home to the
city's wealthy elite, and it's clear that
while they were Hindu, these city elites
had a great deal of admiration for their
Muslim rivals to the north.
In these spacious houses, the
architecture clearly shows a blend of
Indian and Islamic styles.
Some wall paintings in Vijayanagara even
show the court wearing clothing in the
style of their Muslim neighbours for
formal events;
tall caps and flowing gowns.
Outside the walls of the city, the
surrounding countryside was divided into
a lacework of roads and fields joining
villages and larger towns that all
provided grains like rice and millet, as
well as squashes, gourds, and other
vegetables to the great city itself,
brought in enormous quantities by
bullock carts that would have filled the
roads with a thick traffic.
The perspectives of historians on
Vijayanagara vary greatly, and in the
past has caused huge disagreements,
often among historians who may be
approaching the evidence from a
nationalist perspective or from a
colonial or post-colonial perspective.
Some of this is down to the differing
ideologies of these historians,
but the Vijayanagara Empire was a place of
paradoxes and contrasts.
On one hand, its rulers clearly modeled
themselves on the old Hindu South Indian
empires of the past.
One clear example is in the temples they
built, which drew inspiration from
ancient Hindu empires like the Chalukyas,
the Pandyas, and the Cholas.
These buildings were designed to
reinforce the empire's connection to the
Hindu powers of the past, but in many
other ways, it was also a surprisingly
radical experiment, a hybrid culture that
took Hindu traditions and married them
with an outward and forward-looking
desire for new influences from the
Muslim world and beyond.
The world of medieval India was
fast-moving and competitive, and those
kingdoms that fell behind often didn't
last long.
One king of Vijayanagara in particular,
named Devaraya II, was all too aware of
this.
He was determined to modernize and
hybridize the empire of Vijayanagara,
and end the days of it paying tribute to
the powerful Muslim kingdoms to the
north.
To do this, he would open the
empire's doors to the world.
Devaraya II
came to the throne in the year 1432
as a boy of only eight years old.
One Persian visitor to his court, who
arrived about eight years later, gives
the following description of the teenage
king.
The king was dressed in a robe of green
satin. Around his neck he wore a collar
composed of pearls of beautiful water
and other splendid gems.
He was of an olive color, of a spare body,
and rather tall.
He was exceedingly young, for there was
only some slight down upon his cheeks,
and none upon his chin.
His whole appearance was very
repossessing.
This young king Devaraya was
determined to turn his empire into a
modern outward-looking state.
To do this,
he sent out word to the Muslim world
that the doors of his kingdom were now
open.
He welcomed talented Muslim courtiers
into his kingdom, and enlisted as many as
200 Muslim officers into his army, as the
scholar Ferishta recalls.
Devaraya gave orders to enlist Muslims
in his service, allotting them estates
and erecting a mosque for their use in
Vijayanagara. He also commanded that no
one should molest them in exercise of
their religion, and moreover,
he ordered a Quran to be placed before
his throne on a rich desk so that the
faithful might perform the ceremony of
obeisance in his presence without sinning
against their laws.
Some carvings on the great temples of
the city show Muslims taking part in its
daily life, showing Arab horse handlers
taking care of their steeds,
and columns in the great Vitthala temple
show Muslim horse riders wearing turbans,
rearing up on the backs of powerful,
imported
horses. The borders of Vijayanagara were
now guarded by large forces of Muslim
cavalry, mercenaries paid from the vast
coffers of the empire,
and to these would soon be added units
of Portuguese and Muslim gunners trained
in the use of muskets.
This influx of newcomers would change
the nature of Vijayanagara's military,
bringing advanced modern battle
strategies and the increased use of
cavalry,
and it would have changed the fabric of
the city itself.
Devaraya II also engaged in large-scale
infrastructure projects, digging large
networks of canals that expanded the
agricultural potential of the land
around the city.
The metropolis boomed to even greater
size,
and the Persian ambassador Abdur Razzak
was so impressed by the city when he
visited in the year 1443 that he gave
the following incredible account of the
bustling life of the city's markets.
From the third to the seventh fortress,
shops and bazaars are loosely crowded
together.
By the palace of the king, there are four
bazaars situated opposite to one another.
At the head of each bazaar there is a
lofty arcade and magnificent gallery, but
the palace of the king is loftier than
all of them.
The bazaars are very broad and long so
that the sellers of flowers are able to
sell flowers from both sides.
Sweet-scented flowers are always
procurable fresh in that city.
Even traveling from the wealthy Silk
Road city of Samarkand, Abdur Razzak was
struck by the obvious wealth of the
citizens of Vijayanagara.
This country is so well-populated that
it is impossible in a reasonable space
to convey an idea of it.
In the king's treasury, there are
chambers with excavations in them filled
with molten gold forming one mass.
All the inhabitants of the country,
whether high or low, even down to the
artificers of the bazaar,
wear jewels and gilt ornaments in their
ears and around their necks, arms, wrists,
and fingers.
Abdur Razzak was especially struck by the
vast stone elephant stables which can
still be seen in the ruins of
Vijayanagara today.
Opposite the minister's office are the
elephant sheds. The king has many
elephants in the country, but the large
ones are especially reserved for the
palace.
The king has a white elephant,
exceedingly large, with here and there as
many as 30 spots of color.
Every morning, this animal is brought
into the presence of the monarch, for to
cast an eye upon him is thought a
favorable omen.
Each has a separate stall;
the walls are very strong and high, and
are covered with strong wood.
He gives a clearly quite bashful
account of the city's apparently
thriving red light district.
Opposite the mint is the office of the
prefect of the city, to which it is said
12,000 policemen are attached, and their
pay, which equals each day twelve
thousand fanams,
is derived from the proceeds of the
brothels.
The splendor of those houses, the beauty
of the heart ravishers, their
blandishments and ogles,
are beyond all description.
It is best to be brief on the matter.
Finally, he was brought in to meet the
king Devaraya, who at that point would
have been around the age of 19.
Perhaps most illuminating about this
meeting is how many questions the Hindu
king asked his Muslim visitor.
He bombarded the Persian ambassador with
inquiries about the great Muslim powers
of the world, how many horsemen the king
of Persia had under his command, what his
great nobles were like, and how they
behaved.
He asked many questions about the great
cities of Herat and Shiraz, and it's
clear from this the curiosity and
fascination he held for the Muslim world.
But being the king of a medieval kingdom
like Vijayanagara
could be a dangerous business.
Devaraya sat at the top of a towering
and fragile hierarchy packed with
jealous rivals.
While the Persian ambassador Abdur Razzak
was staying in the city, Devaraya II was
the target of one particularly dramatic
and audacious assassination attempt by
one of his brothers, which shows just how
dangerous the life of a king could be.
This brother of King Devaraya plotted to
first slaughter all the high-ranking
officials in his government
before finally heading to the royal
chambers and killing the king himself.
The first part of the plan went off
without a hitch, as Abdur Razzak writes.
The king's brother, who had had a new
house built for himself,
invited thither the monarch and the
principal personages of the empire. At
short intervals, the prince either came
in person or sent some messengers to say
that such-and-such great personage
should come and eat his part of the
banquet.
Care had been taken to bring together
all the drums, kettle drums, trumpets, and
flutes that could be found in the city,
and these instruments playing all at the
same time made a tremendous uproar.
As soon as the individual who had been
sent for entered the above-mentioned
house, two assassins placed in ambush
sprang out upon him, pierced him with a
dagger, and cut him to pieces. In
consequence of the noise of the drums,
the clamour, and the tumult, no one, with
the exception of a small number to whom
the secret was entrusted, was aware of
what was going on.
In this manner, all those who had any
name or rank in the state were
slaughtered.
Once his grisly work was done, the
treacherous brother went to the king's
quarters to strike the final blow of his
coup.
He entered the royal chamber with a
plate of betel nuts and leaves for the
king to chew,
but beneath these leaves he had
concealed a hidden blade.
Coming close to the king, the brother
told him that the court was ready for
him, and offered him some of the betel.
But perhaps the king had detected
something strange in the way his brother
stepped towards him.
He declined, saying that he didn't feel
well that day.
Abdur Razzak recalls what happened next
as the treacherous brother lost his
patience.
This unnatural brother, thus losing the
hope of enticing the king to his house,
drew his poniard and struck him there
with several violent blows so that the
prince fell at the back of his throne.
The traitor, thus believing that the king
was dead, left there one of his
confidants to cut off the monarch's head.
Then, going out of the hall, he ascended
to the portico of the palace and thus
addressed the people; I have slain the
king.
His brothers and such-and-such emirs,
Brahmins, and viziers,
now
I am king.
But he had not counted on the king's
resilience.
As the treacherous brother’s accomplice
approached King Devaraya to decapitate
him, the king fought back in dramatic
fashion.
Meanwhile, his emissary had approached
the throne with the intention of cutting
off the king's head, but that prince,
seizing the seat behind which he had
fallen, struck the wretch with it with so
much violence on the chest that he fell
upon his back. The king then, with the
help of one of his guards, slew this
assassin and went out of the palace by
the way of the harem.
His brother, still standing on the top of
the steps of the hall of council, invited
the multitude to recognize him as their
king.
At that moment, the monarch cried out,
I am alive! I am well and safe! Seize that
wretch.
The whole crowd assembled together, threw
themselves upon the guilty prince, and
put him to death.
This dramatic episode gives us a sense
of the life-and-death stakes that the
emperors of Vijayanagara faced every day.
The kings who followed Devaraya II
were not always as lucky as he was.
The great King Devaraya finally died in
the year 1446.
His reign had been a golden age;
he had left his kingdom a larger,
wealthier, and more outward-looking place
than he had found it, but the period that
followed was one of chaos and
dissolution in the empire.
Devaraya’s son
is said quite mysteriously to have died
of a broken heart, which is perhaps a
euphemism for poison.
His grandson took the throne, but would
go on to be murdered by his own son.
In a Shakespearean turn, this
great-grandson of Devaraya was
apparently horrified by what he had done,
and refused to take up the throne he had
murdered his father for.
He passed it on to one of his younger
brothers, who quickly had him put to
death.
As blood ran in torrents from the throne,
chaos began to engulf the empire, and
soon, the commanders of the military
began to hunger for power themselves.
One of these was a powerful general
named Saluva Narasimha, a name that means
‘man-lion’. This general was a colorful
character,
a poet, and a self-styled expert in
lovemaking.
In the year
1485, he seized the throne in a military
coup and ended the Sangama Dynasty that
had ruled for 150 years since the first
days of Vijayanagara and the two Sangama
brothers, Bukka and Harihara, who had
founded it.
The libidinous general Saluva Narasimha
didn't seem to care much for the boring
business of actually ruling his kingdom.
He spent much of his time apparently
writing a long book of detailed erotic
instruction, but he died only a few years
after taking the throne.
It's during this period of chaos and the
reign of the hapless kings that followed
that in the year 1498, the first
Portuguese ship, captained by the
explorer Vasco de Gama, arrived in South
India, having sailed all the way around
the coast of Africa.
He would be the first European captain
to ever do so, but he would be followed
by many others.
The Portuguese would soon set up a
trading post at Goa on India's west
coast, and in the coming centuries,
European powers would increase their
presence and influence in India.
But at the time, the appearance of these
foreigners excited little attention in
the court of Vijayanagara.
This time of chaos and upheaval in the
empire would only come to an end with
the reign of a man who would come to be
known as one of the greatest and
certainly the most famous of the
emperors of South India.
He was a man named Krishnadeva Raya,
the last great king of Vijayanagara.
Krishnadeva was never meant to be the
king.
He was a prince, but his mother was a
lower-ranking woman than any of his
other brothers,
and so, his older brothers Immadi and
Viranarasimha each took a turn at the throne
before he did.
But they catastrophically mismanaged the
kingdom and faced constant rebellions
and uprisings.
When Krishnadeva's older brother finally
lay on his deathbed, he was determined
that his own infant grandson should take
the throne, but he knew that many of the
lords backed his brother Krishnadeva.
In a final dying wish, he ordered that
his brother should be blinded,
which under Indian law would mean he
could not become king.
According to legend, the king's servants
had no confidence in his baby son
actually taking the throne, but they were
still afraid to anger the dying king.
In a daring move, they brought him the
eyes of a recently slaughtered goat,
still dripping with blood, and told him
that his wishes had been carried out.
The king died satisfied that his line
was secure, and Krishnadeva effortlessly
took the throne.
The Portuguese traveller Domingo Paes
gives the following account of the
appearance of King Krishnadeva.
The king is of medium height and a fair
complexion and good figure,
rather fat than thin.
He has on his face signs of smallpox.
He is the most feared and perfect king
that could possibly be,
cheerful of disposition and very merry.
He is one that seeks to honor foreigners
and receives them kindly, asking about
all their affairs, whatever their
condition may be.
He is a great ruler and a man of much
justice,
but subject to certain fits of rage,
and this is his title;
king of kings, lord of great lords of
India, lord of the three seas and of the
land.
Krishna Devaraya was also what we might
think of today as a fitness fanatic.
Domingo Paes writes the following
account of his daily routine.
The king is accustomed every day to
drink a three-quarter pint of sesame oil
before daylight, and anoints himself all
over with the same oil.
He covers his loins with a small cloth
and takes in his arms great weights made
of earthenware, and then,
taking a sword, he exercises himself
with it ‘til has sweated out all the
oil, and then he wrestles with one of his
wrestlers.
After this labor, he mounts a horse and
gallops about the plain in one direction
and another ‘til dawn, for
he does all this before daybreak.
Krishnadeva showed a similar
energetic attitude to his rule.
One of his first acts was to embark on a
campaign against the troublesome Lord of
Elephants, the king of the Gajapatis
in the east.
He marched his armies into that humid
forest region and seized important forts
along the way.
King Krishnadeva was a poet,
and he wrote the following words in his
epic poem Aamuktamaalyada
about his campaign against the
Gajapatis in the east.
In the Blue Hills of Puri, under the
protective gaze of blue-robed Balram and
lord Krishna, whose eyes are like blue
water lilies, I prepared for battle and
struck fear into the Gajapatis’
heart with my powerful arms pounding the
drums of war.
The Gajapatis king eventually
surrendered, and in a classic example of
conflict resolution in this period, he
offered his daughter in marriage to
Krishnadeva, who returned all the coastal
territory back to the now humbled
Gajapatis.
This victory must have boosted his
reputation at home and fed what was
apparently an enormous ego.
Krishna Devaraya's royal inscriptions
gush with self-praise.
Overcome by his glory, the sun sinks into
the western ocean as if quite unable to
endure the distress of mine.
As if fearing that the seven oceans
would provide a refuge to his enemies,
they were dried up by the clouds of dust
raised by the earth, trampled to pieces
by his horsemen.
But Krishnadeva was also an eminently
practical man.
He published a series of political
maxims that contained advice for how a
kingdom should be ruled, how it should
operate efficiently and secure its
access to resources, as the following
example written by him shows.
A king should improve the harvest of his
country, and so encourage its commoners
that horses, elephants, precious gems,
sandalwood, pearls, and other articles are
freely imported.
Under King Krishnadeva, the Vijayanagara
Empire nearly doubled in size and would
soon reach its largest historical extent,
and it would also achieve its greatest
degree of centralization.
At heart, it was still a feudal society,
and its regions were ruled by lords
known as nayakas.
These nayakas paid taxes to the empire
but otherwise enjoyed a degree of
independence,
as the Portuguese visitor Domingo Paes
recalls.
These captains who he has over these
troops of his are the nobles of his
kingdom.
They are lords and they hold the city and
the towns and villages of the kingdom.
There are captains amongst them who have
a revenue of a million and a million a
half of pardaos,
others a hundred thousand pardaos,
others 200,
300, or 500,000 pardaos.
As each one has revenue,
so the king fixes for him the number of
troops he must maintain
in foot,
horse,
and elephants.
These troops are always ready for duty
whenever they may be called out,
and
wherever they may have to go.
Besides maintaining these troops, each
captain has to make his annual payments
to the king.
Krishna Devaraya was also a great
builder.
To mark his coming to the throne, in 1510
he ordered the construction of a grand
gateway tower known as a gopura to adorn
the temple to Virupaksha,
as well as a central pillared hall
covered in ornate carvings.
This remarkable temple tower was
designed based on mathematical
principles using a fractal design in
which small parts of the tower resemble
the whole.
This gives the tower a mesmerizing shape
and represents the infinite repetition
of universes that lies at the heart of
Hindu cosmology,
as the scholar William J. Jackson
describes.
The ideal form,
gracefully artificed,
suggests the infinite rising levels of
existence and consciousness,
expanding sizes rising towards
transcendence above,
and at the same time, housing the sacred
deep within.
For the nearby Vittala temple, Krishna
Devaraya also commissioned a striking
piece of art to be carved out of several
blocks of granite.
It was a temple chariot made of stone,
complete with wheels and ornate
decorations
which can still be seen in the courtyard
of the Vittala temple in Hampi today.
This was a true golden age in South
India,
a time of peace, stability, and prosperity,
but this period of calm would not last.
In fact, Krishna Devaraya would be the
last great king of Vijayanagara.
In little more than 50 years,
this vast city would be destroyed, its
temples and palaces burned, its streets
emptied of people, and its houses left to
crumble into the earth.
The beginning of the downfall of
Vijayanagara began with an event that to
its people must have felt like a
fantastic development.
That's the fragmentation and collapse of
their long-standing rival to the north,
the Muslim Bahmani Sultanate.
Like the empire of Vijayanagara, the
Bahmani Sultanate had been successful
by combining disparate elements.
For decades, they had been
enthusiastically importing people from
across the Muslim world;
soldiers, architects, artists, holy men, and
scholars, and these people had helped to
transform it into a world center of
culture and innovation.
But this policy also had its costs.
Soon, conflicts began to unfold between
the Indian Bahmanis and the newcomers,
mostly Persian-speaking Iranians who
were referred to as the Westerners.
Throughout the 15th century, the Indian
Muslims in the sultanate became
increasingly angry at the growing
influence of these foreign arrivals, and
as the 16th century neared, their anger
turned mutinous.
When the enraged ruler of Ahmednagar
rebelled in the year 1490,
the other regions of the sultanate soon
followed.
By the time Krishna Devaraya came to the
throne of Vijayanagara in the year 1509,
the Bahmani Sultanate was already
splintering.
By the year 1518, it had fractured into
five individual kingdoms, whose sultans
immediately began fighting amongst
themselves over small pieces of land.
The power of the Bahmanis evaporated in
just a matter of years, and Vijayanagara
was now all but unchallenged in the
south of India.
For King Krishna Devaraya, still only a
young man of 17 years old and still
buzzing from his victory against the
Gajapatis, the chaos in these
neighboring kingdoms presented an
obvious opportunity.
That rich triangle of land known as the
Raichur Doab, with its fertile farmland
and wealth of diamonds, had been in the
hands of the Bahmanis for many years now.
But with the collapse of the sultanate,
it was now held by just one of these
five sultans,
a man named Ismail Adil Shah,
the sultan of Bijapur.
Alone, he would be no match for the might
of Vijayanagara, and so, in the year 1520,
King Krishnadeva moved to take it from
him with an army of a hundred thousand
soldiers.
The Portuguese-Jewish traveler Fernao
Nuniz was staying in Vijayanagara at the
time of this campaign, and he wrote a
dramatic and colorful account of how it
unfolded.
After the king had made his offerings
and performed sacrifices to his idols,
he left the city of Bisnaga with all his
troops,
and they marched in the following order.
The chief of the guard led the advance
with 30,000 infantry;
archers, men and shields, and musketeers,
and spear-men, and a thousand horse and
his elephants.
All were equally well-armed,
each after his own fashion;
the archers and musketeers with their
quilted tunics, and the shield-men with
their swords and daggers in their
girdles.
In the days that followed, King
Krishnadeva marched this large army
across the Tungabhadra River, and laid
siege to the fort of Raichur.
But this would not be as easy as
Krishnadeva hoped.
The kings of Vijayanagara had still not
taken advantage of the developing
technology of the cannon, although they
had employed several Portuguese
musketeers as mercenaries.
Raichur Fort was a powerful fortress
perched on top of a rocky hilltop, and
without effective siege equipment, the
Hindus resorted to old old-fashioned
tactics, hacking away at the fort walls
with pickaxes and hammers.
The defenders meanwhile were well-
-stocked with cannons and rained down
fire from the walls.
These cannons did have one weakness;
they were unable to fire directly
downwards at the men with their pickaxes
hacking away at the masonry beneath.
Still, they dealt a terrible toll on the
besieging soldiers as they approached.
The siege looked like it would last
forever, but then one morning, Krishnadeva
got word that the sultan of Bijapur
himself was marching south towards him
at the head of an army.
This army was made up of his best crack
troops, equipped with nearly a thousand
of the latest powerful cannons imported
from Persia.
Perhaps feeling just a tremble of
apprehension, Krishnadeva lifted the
siege and went out to meet the sultan in
battle.
Fernao Nuniz, who witnessed these two
armies come together, describes in
visceral terms the noise they made as
they prepared to fight.
Seeing that dawn was now breaking, the
drums and trumpets and other music in
the king's camp began to sound and the
men to shout
so that it seemed as if the sky would
fall to the earth,
then the neighing and excitement of the
horses and the trumpeting of the
elephants;
it is impossible for anyone to describe
how it was.
It would hardly be believed the great
fear and terror that struck those who
heard it, so that even those very men
that caused the noise were themselves
frightened at it,
and the enemy on their part made no less
noise so that if you asked anything, you
could not hear yourself speak, and you
had to ask by signs,
since in no manner could you make
yourself
understood. This encounter, which has come
to be known as the Battle of Raichur,
is the perfect embodiment of the chaos
and violence of a medieval battle.
Although Vijayanagara had brought the
larger army, the sultan of Bijapur was
confident that his superior firepower
would scatter the Hindus and bring him
victory.
When the battle began, he ordered his
cannoneers to fire all of their guns at
once in a devastating volley.
Fernao Nuniz recounts what happened
next, as a thousand cannonballs tore
through the ranks of the Vijayanagara
soldiers.
He commanded the whole of the artillery
at once to open fire, which discharged as
it was very great, did much damage to the
enemy, killing many of the horse and foot
and many elephants,
and it compelled the King Krishnadeva’s
troops to retire.
As soon as the Moors saw their enemies
beginning to leave the field,
they charged all amongst them,
slaughtering them for about half a
league.
It looked like all was lost for
Vijayanagara,
but King Krishnadeva refused to admit
defeat.
He rallied his generals and elite
cavalry around him, and gave a stunning
and quite ruthless order.
When the king saw the way in which his
troops fled, he began to cry that they
were traitors
and that he would see who was his side,
and that since they all had to die,
they should meet their fate boldly.
“Who ranges himself with me?” he cried.
Immediately, there thronged about him
all those lords and captains that were
ready to side with him,
then he took a ring from his finger and
gave it to one of his pages so that he
might show it to his queens in token of
his death.
Then he mounted a horse and moved
forward with all his remaining divisions,
commanding to slay without mercy every
man of those who had fled.
According to this account, Krishnadeva
and his generals began slaughtering
their own fleeing men until they managed
to make them turn and flee in the
opposite direction.
The pure crushing weight of these bodies,
backed by as many as 27,000 horses,
seems to have turned the tide back on
the Muslim soldiers.
The sultan's cannons had all fired at
once, and they all had to stop to reload
at the same time, meaning that they were
unable to summon another volley.
While pursuing the fleeing men of
Vijayanagara, the sultan's men had
abandoned their ranks,
and when the enemy turned and pushed
back, they found themselves in disarray.
The fleeing rabbit had once again turned
around and bitten its pursuer.
Nuniz breathlessly describes what
happened next.
The confusion was so great amongst the
Moors and such havoc was wrought in
their ranks that they did not even try
to defend the camp they had made so
strong and enclosed so well.
But like lost men, they leapt into the
river to save themselves.
Then after them came large numbers of
the king's troops and elephants, which
latter worked amongst the mischief
without end, for they seized men with
their trunks
and tore them into small pieces.
A final push by the elite troops of
Vijayanagara drove the sultan's entire
army into the waters of the Krishna
River, where a massacre began.
The army of Bijapur was defeated, but at
terrible cost.
Sixteen thousand of Krishnadeva's men
had been killed in the battle, as Fernao
Nuniz recounts.
Here, the king stayed till all the dead
had been burned,
and the customary honours had been paid
to them,
and here he gave much arms for the souls
of those who had been killed in battle
on his side.
Those numbered sixteen thousand and odd.
Krishnadeva now returned to the siege of
the fort, and it's here that he seems to
have employed the help of a company of
Portuguese mercenaries led by a captain
named Christovao de Figueyredo.
While Krishnadeva seems to have employed
a limited number of soldiers with
matchlock muskets in his army, these
European mercenaries had brought with
them the latest arquebuses.
These long-barreled guns achieved an
astonishing degree of accuracy for early
firearms.
Fernao Nuniz writes an account of this
final siege and how this small group of
Portuguese snipers tipped the balance in
the battle for Raichur Fort,
with either a very skillful or a very
lucky shot.
Christovao de Figueyredo went close to the
trench before the walls, keeping himself
as much concealed as possible.
Seeing how fearlessly the Moors
exposed themselves on the wall,
began with the musketeers, whom he had
brought, to open fire on them in such a
way that he slew many, the Moors being
careless and free from fear.
The captain of the city, seeing the
dismay that had spread amongst his
people,
began to turn them back with encouraging
words, and he, wishing to see for himself
where the Portuguese were,
reached over with his body in front of
one of the embrasures and was killed
with a musket shot that struck him in
the middle of his forehead.
As soon as the captain was thus killed,
there was great lamentation in the city,
and soon there was no one defending the
wall.
Raichur Fort surrendered soon after.
These rich lands now belonged to
Vijayanagara,
an accomplishment that many kings before
had tried and failed to
achieve. Krishnadeva was clearly
overjoyed, but his victory had caused a
ripple of concern among all the Muslim
kingdoms of the region.
Fernao Nuniz recounts that the king
soon received a number of diplomats, all
carrying similar messages from the
neighboring sultans.
They all warned him that he should not
attempt to overreach, he should be
content with his victory, and not upset
the natural balance of the region.
With the hindsight that history gives us,
we know that Krishnadeva should have
taken this warning seriously,
but he did not.
Krishnadeva sent out the same reply to
every one of the sultans, which Fernao
Nuniz recorded.
I have seen your letters and thank you
much for what you have sent to say.
As regards Adil Shah, what I have done to
him and taken from him, he has richly
deserved.
As regards returning it to him, that does
not seem to me reasonable, nor am I going
to do it.
As for your further statement that
you will all turn against me if I do not
do as you ask,
I pray you do not take the trouble to
come to me,
for I will come to find you myself if
you dare to await me in your lands.
This I send you for answer.
In fact, the young Krishnadeva was so
emboldened that he decided to do what no
king of Vijayanagara had dreamed of for
more than a hundred
years; that was to march north and seize
the sultan's capital city of Bijapur
itself.
Bijapur was one of the great cities of
South India, and the largest and
wealthiest in the lands that had once
been part of the Bahmani Sultanate. It
was a great center of culture, trade, and
commerce, and was home to a great variety
of gardens and water pavilions.
One North Indian visitor to the city
would later describe it in the following
glowing terms.
All around the gate of my residence were
lofty buildings with houses very healthy
and airy. Before each shop was a
beautiful green tree, and the whole
bizarre was extremely clean and pure.
It was filled with rare goods such as
are not seen or heard of in any other
town.
Perhaps no place in the wide world could
present a more wonderful spectacle to
the eye of the traveller.
The Portuguese observer Fernao Nuniz
traveled with Krishna Devaraya as he
embarked on this campaign far into enemy
territory.
He recalls the site of the great city of
Bijapur as Krishnadeva's armies
approached it, and mentions that its
houses reminded him of buildings back
home in Europe.
The king journeyed so far that he
even went as far as Bijapur, which is
the best city in all the kingdom.
It has numbers of beautiful houses built
according to our own fashion, with many
gardens and bowers made of grape vines
and pomegranates and oranges and lemons,
and all other kind of garden produce.
Seeing Krishnadeva’s massive army
approach,
the sultan of Bijapur did the only thing
he could; he fled the city and went into
hiding.
Krishnadeva marched into Bijapur without
a fight and decided to stay there for as
long as it took for the sultan to turn
himself over.
But the sultan Adil Shah refused to come
out of hiding,
and so, Krishnadeva and his army settled
down in the city and waited.
During his lengthy stay in Bijapur,
Krishnadeva's army put an enormous
strain on the city, and in fact, they
would all but destroy it.
To keep themselves warm at night, the
soldiers demolished its beautiful
buildings and burned them as firewood,
and drank so much water that its
reservoirs ran dry.
The whole city of Bijapur was slowly
demolished as though eaten by termites,
until only the palaces where Krishnadeva
was staying were still standing, as Fernao
Nuniz recalls.
The city was left almost in ruins,
not that the king had commanded it to be
destroyed,
but that his troops, in order to make
fires for cooking, had torn down so many
houses that it was a great grief to see.
The sultan Adil Shah
went to ask the king what wrong the
houses had done that he had commanded to
destroy them,
for there remained no other houses
standing save only the palaces where the
king Krishnadeva was staying.
The king sent answer that it was not he
who had done it, but that he could not
control his people.
Eventually, drinking water in the city
ran out, and Krishnadeva was finally
forced to leave.
He had not captured the sultan of
Bijapur, but he had certainly made his
point.
Vijayanagara was now without doubt the
strongest power in South India.
The sultans who had once loomed over it
now fled at the advance of its armies,
and their cities could be plucked like
ripe fruit.
It was a point that King Krishnadeva
clearly delighted in making, but it was
one that the Deccan sultans would not
forget.
The destruction of Bijapur left a
stinging reminder that if they continued
fighting amongst themselves, a greater
power to the south would swallow them up
one by one.
Krishnadeva's actions would remind these
sultans that they would soon need to
stand together, and in that way, this
resounding victory would lead in the
coming years to the dissolution and
collapse of the entire empire of
Vijayanagara.
If you had the choice to travel back in
time and see just one week in the age of
Vijayanagara, a good choice would be the
week of the Mahanavami Festival,
a lavish ceremony that ran for 10 days,
usually in October.
The Persian ambassador Abdur Razzak
witnessed this event in the year
1443, and gave the following account of
its chaotic and colourful scenes.
All the readers and storytellers,
musicians and jugglers, were rewarded by
the king with gold and garments. For
three continuous days, this royal fate
continued with the most gorgeous display.
One cannot without entering into great
detail mention all the various kinds of
pyrotechnic
and fireworks and various other
amusements which were exhibited.
He recounts the splendor of the elephant
procession that took place during this
festival.
They brought with them a thousand
elephants resembling the waves of a
troubled sea or a stormy cloud which
were covered with brilliant armor, and
with castles magnificently adorned in
which were jugglers and artificers.
On the trunks and ears of these animals
had been drawn with cinnabar and other
substances
extraordinary pictures and figures of
wonderful beauty.
The traveler Domingo Paes was lucky
enough to see this event when he visited
Vijayanagara nearly 80 years later, in
the year 1520.
It's clear that by that time, the
opulence of the ceremony had only
increased.
As soon as the king had finished his
ceremonies, he again took horse and
returned to the city in the same way he
had come,
the troops never weary of their shouting.
As soon as he passed by them, they began
to march.
Then,
to see those who were on the hills and
slopes and the descent of them with
their shouts and beating of shields and
shaking of arrows and bows, they were
without count.
Truly, I was so carried out with myself
that it seemed as if what I saw was a
vision and that I was in a dream.
As Paes saw this procession pass by, he
could have had no idea that the final
decades of this great society were now
at hand,
that in only a few decades, these streets
would be empty, with grasses and vines
pushing up through the stones.
The last great king of Vijayanagara,
Krishna Devaraya, died on the 17th of
October in the year
1529,
apparently after falling ill while
preparing for another campaign against
his old enemy, the sultan of Bijapur.
While successful at all other aspects of
being king, he'd had little luck with
siring a son.
Krishnadeva did have two sons, one of
whom at six years old became a casualty
of courtly intrigue.
He was named the crown prince, but this
was also his death sentence.
Within a year, the boy was poisoned, with
Krishnadeva suspecting his own prime
minister, who he then had blinded.
When the king died, his remaining son was
too young to be considered, and so, the
crown passed to his younger brother
Achyuta.
This man seems to have had no talent for
ruling, as Fernao Nuniz recalls.
King
Achyutaraya, after he ascended the throne,
gave himself over to vice and tyranny.
Here is a man of very little honesty, and
on account of this, the people and the
captains are much discontented with his
evil life
and inclinations.
In the vacuum left by the death of the
great king, a number of opportunists were
beginning to fancy their chances. Chief
among these was a divisive and ruthless
social climber in whose hands the empire
of Vijayanagara would finally collapse
into ash and flame.
His name was Ramaraya.
Ramaraya had led a remarkably colorful
life.
He began his career as a courtier in the
kingdom of Golcanda to the north,
but he had a keen sense for situations
in which he could better his position,
and during the golden age of
Krishnadeva's reign, he made his way
south to the Vijayanagara court to serve
him.
Ramaraya's mother had been the daughter
of a chieftain in the east, and these
family credentials were apparently
enough for him to marry a princess.
This ambitious young man was now the
son-in-law to the king, and at every turn
he would work to increase his power and
influence in the court.
When Krishnadeva's brother Achyuta died
after ruling for 13 years, his young son
took the throne, and the plotting at
court reached fever pitch.
Ramaraya joined a number of
unsuccessful plots before finally
raising a successful rebellion with the
intention of putting a young boy named
Sadasiva on the throne,
who was a quite distant nephew of the
dead king Krishnadeva.
But of course it was Ramaraya who was
truly in charge.
This young boy Sadasiva was put on the
throne in the year 1542,
and Ramaraya, then around the age of
57, became his regent.
A regent was a person who runs the
complicated affairs of state while a
young boy king grows up.
The idea was that at the age of 16, the
boy could take up these duties himself,
and the regent, his duty done, would be
quietly
excused. But of course, this is not quite
how things played out.
When the young boy king Sadasiva
reached adulthood, he demanded to take
over the reins of the state.
Ramaraya had him imprisoned.
The boy king would now appear only once
a year to the crowds while Ramaraya
acted as emperor in all but name.
By the year 1562,
even these annual appearances were
stopped.
One of the great historical composers of
Carnatic music was a man named Kanaka
Dasa.
He lived during the life of King
Krishnadeva and saw his death,
as well as the time of chaos that
followed.
During this time, he wrote a surviving
piece of poetry that describes how many
of the citizens of Vijayanagara must
have felt as the kingdom descended over
the 23 years that the usurper Ramaraya
remained on the throne.
Where did truth and duty go?
The noble can't survive anymore.
Thieves and habitual adulterers strike
it rich.
The rest are poor.
Family members turn hostile. Fools puffed
up with pride forget god, guru, and elders.
Decent holy people go unprotected.
No one pays the soldiers. No helping
rains shower the earth.
Those with food and clothes are
corrupted by bribery.
Immature dogs full of trickery multiply
like cruel snakes.
Traitors to god win houses, gain cows and
wealth and grain.
Earth groans under the weight,
tottering,
crying.
Worshipers of Shiva are clashing with
the Vishnu devotees.
Great offerings are made to the most
horrific violent gods. Who could list
all the wrongs of the time?
While operating the empire's foreign
policy, Ramaraya acted just as deviously.
As the emperor of Vijayanagara, he
plotted to turn the sultans of the
Deccan against one another.
These sultans often asked for
Vijayanagara's help in their wars
against one another, and so, he would ally
first with one, then another, with the
hope of thereby weakening them all
and keeping them at each other's throats.
He would often promise not to destroy
mosques or unnecessarily hurt Muslim
civilians, but according to some sources,
these promises were not often kept.
Eventually, one of these sultans, a man
named Hussain Nizam Shah I of
the sultanate of Ahmadnagar, would soon
have had enough.
It's clear that the sultan Hussain hated
Ramaraya
on a personal level.
Ferishta recalls one meeting between
these men when the king of Vijayanagara
openly insulted his guest.
Hussain and Nizam Shah went to meet
Ramaraya.
At the time of the meeting,
Ramaraya showed great vanity and
loftiness and remained seated,
and had Hussain Nizam Shah kiss his hand
in this manner.
Hussain Nizam Shah was furious at the
improper behavior of Ramaraya, and in
order to reproach the Raja,
he at once called for water and washed
his hands.
On seeing this,
Ramaraya was enraged and said in the
Kannada language, if this man were not my
guest, I would instantly cut him to bits
with my sword.
These insults clearly stung Hussain, but
the final straw would come when
Ramaraya apparently sent a long and
insulting list of demands for tribute to
the Muslim sultan.
According to one obscure poet, an Indian
Muslim named Shauqi, this list of demands
included camels from Kabul, ambergris,
aloes, musk, a large silver bell, a golden
flute, gold and precious goods, weapons
such as maces and Bahmani daggers, jade
pitchers, ruby cups, diamond cubes,
and perhaps most insultingly of all, the
foot bracelets of the sultan's wife.
Finally, he demanded that Hussain stop
eating beef,
turn away from Mecca,
and convert to worshiping Shiva.
If Hussain refused, the poet relates the
following threat allegedly delivered by
Ramaraya.
I'll spare neither Turk nor Turkish bow.
I'll spare neither rich nor poor.
I will not spare the brides of India,
nor will I spare the brides of Sind. I
won't spare a single scholar or holy man,
neither aged nor youth,
neither young man or old.
Whether this episode is true
or just one of the many poetic
flourishes invented by the poet Shauqi,
what is certain is that for this Sultan
Hussain, the king of Vijayanagara had
finally gone too far.
He was determined to put aside his
differences with the other sultans of
South India and together join in
partnership against King Ramaraya.
The Portuguese chronicler Diego de Couto
recounts the decision they made next.
After Ramaraya entered their kingdoms
and destroyed and devastated them and
carried great riches away from them,
King Hussain was so afflicted that he
invited the other Moorish kings of the
Deccan
so that they could all set out together
against Ramaraya and destroy him and
divide his kingdoms amongst them.
By this time, after years of war, there
was a deep bitterness between these
sultans.
But faced with the growing insults from
the south, they were prepared to set this
aside.
The sultans of the Deccan sealed their
tentative alliance with marriages, even
exchanging forts as part of their
daughter's dowries in order to settle
the territorial disputes that had
divided them. Through King Ramaraya's
arrogance,
Vijayanagara had united its enemies
against it, and they were now all
marching south, hungry for revenge.
The year was 1565.
By this time, the treacherous usurper
Ramaraya was an old man
now well into his eighties, but when he
heard of the combined forces of the
sultans marching south, he was determined
to ride out with his great army and lead
it to victory,
and he had good reason to be confident.
Despite banding together, the sultans of
the Deccan were still no match for
Vijayanagara in sheer numbers.
According to records, Ramaraya marched
out with 70,000 cavalry and more
than 700,000 foot
soldiers.
More conservative estimates put the
number at around a hundred and fifty
thousand.
This would have been the entirety of the
army of Vijayanagara, with every soldier
withdrawn from every far-flung post and
distant border fort,
and brought to bear for a final decisive
battle for the future of South India.
The stakes for both sides couldn't have
been higher.
After a number of skirmishes, the two
vast armies finally met on the plains
that stretch out on the banks of the
river Krishna, between the villages of
Rakkasa and Tangadi.
But today, this confrontation is
remembered by the name of a fortified
town about 25 kilometers to the north,
a place called Talikota.
For the sultans of the Deccan, the odds
at the battle of Talikota didn't look
good.
The forces of Vijayanagara outnumbered
them significantly, and the advantage in
firepower that the sultan's ancestors
had enjoyed at the Battle of Raichur
had also been wiped out.
In the more than 40 years since the
armies of Krishnadeva had scraped a
victory on the banks of the river
Krishna, they had learned to respect the
power of cannon fire, and Vijayanagara
had truly joined the gunpowder age.
Sources claim that Ramaraya marched
to meet the sultans with a thousand
cannons.
He clearly believed that with superior
numbers and now with superior firepower
too, the result of the battle would not
be in question.
The scholar Ferishta recalls the
daunting sight that awaited the sultans.
It was at length fully ascertained that
the only safe passage for the army
was directly in the enemy's front, which
was in his possession
and who had constructed field
fortifications strengthened by cannon
and fireworks
on the opposite bank.
Two thousand war elephants and one
thousand pieces of cannon were placed at
different intervals of his line.
But the armies of the sultans had also
learned lessons from their defeat 40
years earlier,
and they now marched to battle with
decades of experience in using cannon.
This time, instead of arranging their
cannons in a single line that fired all
at once, they were placed in three lines
which could stagger their fire.
Now,
one line could fire while the others
reloaded, creating an almost continuous
blanket of fire.
The effect was truly devastating.
When the battle began, the forces of
Vijayanagara unleashed one big
terrifying barrage, as Ferishta recounts.
Both armies being in motion soon came to
battle,
and the infidels began the attack by
vast flights of rockets and rapid
discharges of artillery.
Ramaraya, now an old man, declined to
travel on horseback, and instead was
carried around the battlefield in a
litter or palanquin.
At one point, he's apparently said to
have surrounded himself with piles of
jewels and coins, and handed these out to
anyone who would charge into the heat of
the battle.
The infidels, inspired by the generosity
of their prince,
charged the right and left of the allies
with such vigor that they were thrown
into temporary disorder, and even to
prepare for retreat.
Hussain, however, remained firm in the
center
and pushed on
so ardently, for the division of Ramraj
was thrown into confusion.
It seemed that the overwhelming numbers
of Vijayanagara would win the day, but
then something happened that would turn
the tide completely.
That is, Ramaraya, the regent, the usurper
of the throne,
was killed.
Accounts of exactly how this happened
differ.
One unlikely-sounding source describes
how the sultans packed their cannons
with copper coins, blasting them into the
enemy ranks in what would be one of the
first uses of a weapon that would come
to be known as grapeshot.
These superheated coins would have torn
like bullets into the Vijayanagara
soldiers, killing their horses and
maiming hundreds.
One source recounts that one of these
coins flew through the sky of the
battlefield, punched through the side of
the palanquin that was carrying the
treacherous King Ramaraya, and killed
him.
Other sources claim that a stampeding
elephant caused Ramaraya's bodyguard to
flee in terror, leaving him to be
captured by an enemy vanguard.
These sources describe him being taken
back to the sultan Hussain, who
immediately ordered him to be beheaded.
Some sources describe Ramaraya's severed
head being stuffed with straw and sent
north to be paraded around the
subcontinent.
But however it happened, the result was
clear;
Ramaraya was killed, and his army fell
into disarray.
Ferishta recounts what happened next.
The Hindus, according to custom, when they
saw their chief destroyed, fled in the
utmost disorder from the field and were
pursued by the allies with such success
that the river was dyed red with their
blood.
It is computed by the best authorities
that above 100,000 infidels were slain
during the action
and in the pursuit.
Those who were able with horses and
elephants fled the battlefield,
while a huge number of foot soldiers
were left behind to be massacred.
The historian Mirza Ibrahim al-Zubairi,
in his work Basatin al-Salatin,
recalls how the sultans now prepared to
march on the defenseless capital city.
During the course of 20 days that they
remained at the seat of war, the sultans
took their ease and nursed the wounded
and sick,
then they turned toward Vijayanagar.
We can imagine the scenes as the
frightened people of Vijayanagara
watched the dribs and drabs of their
defeated grand army returning home,
columns of the wounded and dirty winding
down the road without leaders, telling
stories of the battle and the death of
the king.
Some of Ramaraya's brothers did manage
to escape from the battle of Talikota
and fled back to the capital.
They were now the assumed rulers of the
empire, and the frightened people of the
city must have looked to them for hope,
and they had good reason to be hopeful.
Capital cities were rarely sacked in
medieval India, where ideas of honor were
held in high regard.
It was common to demolish mosques and
Hindu temples in conquered territories,
but unrestrained violence against
civilian populations was relatively rare.
More often, the victorious side would
simply demand an enormous payment to
cover the costs of their campaign and
then some, and then they would return to
their lands triumphant and a good deal
richer.
But when Ramaraya's brothers fled back
to the city, it soon became clear that
they had no intention of paying anything.
In the next days, they gathered up all
the treasure they could,
piled it onto ox carts, and fled,
leaving the city to its fate.
The city of Vijayanagara was now without an
army,
without leaders, and crucially, without
any money to pay off its enemies.
From this point on, the consequences
would have been clear.
The complete loss of the city's
leadership and the collapse of its
military meant that law and order in the
city broke down almost immediately.
Sources recount that hordes of the
empire's own citizens rioted in panic
and anger.
Bands of its own soldiers who had fled
the battle suddenly found themselves
unemployed, and they turned to rampaging
through the streets, stealing whatever
Ramaraya's brothers had left behind,
stripping the city of its wealth before
the sultan's armies had even come into
sight.
We can imagine the pure panic on the
streets during these final days.
The Portuguese writer Diego de Couto
writes that the armies of the sultans
took only three days to reach
Vijayanagara, while the chronicler
Ferishta says it took ten.
During this time, the mood in the city
must have been one of abject terror.
When the sultans reached the city,
they found that Ramaraya's brothers had
fled and its treasuries had been emptied.
With no tribute to be paid, they were
determined to get their money's worth
and began a campaign of looting.
Over the next days and weeks, they would
strip Vijayanagara of any wealth it
had left,
and destroyed the symbols of its leaders,
burning its temples and palaces to the
ground.
The poet Shauqi described this event in
triumphant terms.
The Shah ordered the plunder of the city.
The order was given to both noble and
commoner.
They then rendered the city desolate.
They harassed and killed. Both open and
hidden wealth were revealed.
Treasure was brought up from beneath the
ground.
People came to acquire riches and wealth,
full of merriment, happiness, and delight;
boxes of jewels in the thousands, gold
and silver beyond count. The historian Mirza
Ibrahim al-Zubairi gives a devastating account
of the destruction of the city.
They razed the lofty building and
temples to the ground.
The work of destruction was carried out
with a vengeance.
Vijayanagara was an extensive city,
flourishing and well-populated.
It had never experienced any foreign
invasion for ages.
The nobility, the wealthy, the soldiery,
the peasants, and the artisans all drove
a roaring trade.
During the confusion and disorder
following the Muslim invasion, the
citizens, out of fear,
lurked in their houses, cellars, wells, and
reservoirs.
Those that were well-to-do betook
themselves to the neighboring mountains
and caverns with their family and
chattels. The Muslim army remained at
Vijayanagar for about six months. To a
distance of 20 leagues around the city,
everything was burnt and reduced to ashes.
The historian Robert Sewell describes
the destruction in mournful terms.
With fire and sword, with crowbars and
axes, they carried on day after day their
work of destruction. Never perhaps in the
history of the world has such havoc been
wrought, and wrought suddenly on so
splendid a city, teeming with a wealthy
and industrious population
in the full plenitude of prosperity one
day, and on the next, seized, pillaged, and
reduced to ruins.
Finally, the armies of the sultans left
with what loot they could find, and left
the city in ruins.
The Persian historian Ferishta recounts
the devastated condition of Vijayanagara
and the fragmenting empire it had once
been the heart of.
The kingdom of Beejanuggur
since this battle has never recovered
its ancient splendor.
The city itself was so destroyed that it
is now totally in ruin
and uninhabited,
while the country has been seized on by
the tributary chiefs, each of whom hath
assumed an independent power in his own
district.
But archaeological evidence of the
destruction of the city is not as
damning.
In the royal center, there is a great
deal of fire damage to be found on the
stones of the temples.
Here, the superstructures of wood and
other flammable material were set fire
and burned,
collapsing in and causing the stones
that supported them to crack.
Buildings such as the main royal complex
and the audience hall, with a hundred
stone columns supporting its roof, were
all burned, as well as others that
represented the royal authority of the
state.
But in the residential parts of the city,
the houses and markets, the destruction
was much less, and there's no evidence of
a wholesale burning of the city or of an
enormous massacre.
The Italian Cesare Federici, writing two
years after the empire's defeat, reports
the following.
When news came to the cities of the
overthrow in the battle, the wives and
children of the tyrant fled away,
and the four kings of the Moors entered
the city of Bezeneger with great triumph,
and they remained there six months,
searching under houses and in all places
for money and other things that were
hidden,
and then
they departed to their own kingdoms
because they were not able to maintain
such a kingdom as that was,
so far distant from their own country.
The city of Bezeneger is not altogether
destroyed;
the houses still stand, but empty,
and there is dwelling in them nothing
but tigers
and other wild beasts.
When the armies of the sultans left, the
population of Vijayanagara would emerge
from the caves.
With its leaders gone, its administration
collapsed, and the entire empire
fragmenting into smaller kingdoms, it
seems that the people of the city could
no longer maintain the large and complex
metropolis they had once called home.
They would soon be forced to loot what
remained of the city in order to survive.
Bit by bit, the stone buildings that had
withstood the invading army would be
dismantled or simply left to the vines
and the wild dogs.
The great city of victory was now a
ghost town.
The farmers who continued their lives in
this area would sow rice in the once
lavish gardens of the kings.
They would take stones from the palaces
to build their houses,
and women would wash their clothes in
the once opulent bath houses,
hanging them to dry on the fallen
pillars.
Now, only troops of monkeys would make
their homes among the rocks and the
skeletal remains of ancient halls.
With its status reduced,
the city of Vijayanagara
no longer seemed to suit its grand name.
Instead, it became known by the name of
one of its smaller districts which
remained inhabited among the ruins,
now a small village named
Hampi. This was the ruined place that the
Scottish captain Colin Mackenzie would
wander through nearly 150 years later.
Birds would soon make their homes in the
temple roofs; Indian robins, large grey
babblers, blue rock thrushes, quails, and
the rare yellow-throated bulbul.
Plant life would have gradually
crept in to reclaim the empty streets.
Soon after its abandonment, the stones of
Vijayanagara would have sprouted with
grasses. Banana and coconut palms would
have begun to spring up in the streets
and yards. The wiry branches of the
frangipani tree would burst up through
the temple courtyards, lifting the
flagstones with their roots,
while perennial weeds like the lion's
ear and prickly pears would have
sprouted between the cobblestones.
The kings of Vijayanagara who fled the
destruction of the city did continue to
rule in a much diminished form for
several more decades, and shifted their
courts to their remaining territories in
southern Andhra.
In their grandeur and ceremony, their
processions and festivals, they attempted
to recreate the splendor of their past,
but in reality, they would never again
wield power in the same way.
The glorious days of the great capital
were now a distant memory.
Like their great rivals the Delhi
Sultanate and Bahmani Sultanate before
them, they now ruled over a tiny portion
of what they once had.
By the dawn of the 17th century, that
power, too, evaporated, and the last of
Vijayanagara's Nayaka lords
went their separate ways.
With the economic heart ripped out of
the empire, without the booming economy
of the temples and the markets of the
great metropolis, the surrounding towns
and villages also went into decline.
Port towns far away on the western coast
like Bhatkal and on the eastern coast
like Pulicat also shrunk around this
time.
The dance of Shiva went on,
and another great empire had passed into
ruins.
The historian Manu Pillai describes this
time.
The lessons for the sultans in the
northern Deccan from this episode should
have been clear;
it was the inability of the Deccan's
ancient rulers, the Kakatiyas, Hoysalas,
and Yadavas, to join together against
their common enemy that led to the fall
of their order at the hands of the
Khiljis and Tughlaqs.
When the Bahmani Sultanate emerged, its
leaders too ultimately failed to reign
in dissension, and in only a few
generations, the kingdom was on its way
to decline and disintegration.
The rebel sultans who seceded from the
Bahmanis continued this tradition by
constantly feuding with one another, but
Ramaraya's ambition reminded them at
last that in the game they were playing,
they were all destined to suffer as
losers.
Together then, they rose against Ramaraya
and demolished Vijayanagar for once and
forever, achieving in a stroke something
that even they perhaps could not have
believed was entirely possible.
In the following years,
in the north of India, a new power would
rise in Delhi, founded by a warrior
chieftain from Uzbekistan.
He was Turco-Mongolian in ethnicity, and
today we know the dynasty he founded by
a name derived from the Persian word for
Mongol.
The age of the Mughals had dawned, and a
new, glorious stage of Indian history
would now begin.
But the center of Indian power would now
forever be in the north.
Around the same time,
another much more underwhelming event
would take place,
far from the resplendent finery of the
Mughal court that would have perhaps an
even greater impact on the history of
this land.
In the year 1626, little more than 60
years after the battle of Talikota, the
British East India Company built its
first fortified port near the coastal
town of Pulicat.
This town was once the gateway by sea to
the Vijayanagara Empire, and through here,
the empire had traded with Sri Lanka,
Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, and China.
But in the decades since, the port town
had fallen on hard times.
The fort the British built was shoddy
and indefensible, and the trading company
abandoned it after only six years.
But two years later, the British tried
again a little further to the south, at a
small fishing village called
Madraspatnam.
It's said that the site was chosen
because the head of the company factory,
a man named Francis Day, had fallen in
love with a Tamil girl who lived nearby.
At this time, the land was ruled by one
of the lords left over from the
fragmented and scattered Vijayanagara
Empire.
He was more than happy to grant a lease
to that small bit of humble land to this
foreign company
in exchange for a share of their takings.
This was the first true foothold of the
British East India Company in India, a
foothold that would grow into colonial
domination of the entire land mass, and
it came out of the weakness and
dissolution of the empire of
Vijayanagara.
I want to end this episode with an
extract from the epic poem Aamuktamaalyada,
a masterpiece composed by the last
great king of Vijayanagara, Krishna
Devaraya, in the early 16th century, in
the final decades of his empire.
It tells the story of a wedding between
the god Vishnu and one of his wives, the
saint Andal.
In this extract, a king overhears a
Brahmin priest preaching, and is suddenly
struck with a sense of the temporary,
fleeting nature of life and the passing
glory of great empires.
I think in this moment you get a sense
for its author, Krishna Devaraya,
struggling with his own impermanence, a
keen awareness of his own mortality, and
the fleeting nature of his empire.
As you listen,
imagine what it would feel like to
wander the streets of the great stone
capital of Vijayanagara, now emptied of
all life.
Imagine watching the vines and creepers
push their way between its stones, the
monkeys clambering over the staircases
of broken brick reaching up to the sky.
Imagine watching the once great
reservoirs and bath houses fill up with
weeds and water lilies, the great towers
of the temples now home to bats and wild
dogs.
Imagine watching the sun set over this
great empire as the dance of Shiva, the
dance of creation and destruction, goes
on and on into eternity. On his way, he over-
-heard the visiting Brahman recite another wise
saying; he said just as you should gather
provisions for the rainy season
in the eight months before the monsoon,
you should prepare for night
during the day,
for old age when still young,
and for the next life
right now,
in this life.
While you still can,
you should try your very best
to lead a righteous life.
These words about life's inevitable
future
pierced the king's soul.
The king listened to the
proverb, reflected on it
in his heart,
understood its meaning,
and stopped.
He was stunned,
overwhelmed, and petrified.
He froze and stood in the middle of the
road
in utter distress.
He thought to himself,
oh, what is this glorious empire?
What are these pleasures?
Why these emotions?
This body is nothing but a bubble about
to burst.
Even Manu, the primal man,
who was born at the dawn of time, was
ultimately destroyed,
trampled by the great god of death.
The joys of an empire are as fleeting as
lightning.
Just as travelers ferried to the far
shore without even noticing the
movements of the boat,
so too does time pass,
quickly,
without our realizing it,
and in this trance,
life
passes us by.
Thank you once again for listening to
The Fall of Civilizations Podcast.
I’d like to thank my voice actors for
this episode,
Peter Walters, Chris Harvey, Michael
Hajiantonis, Kim Heron, Nick Denton, and
Paul Casselle.
Readings in Sanskrit were performed by
Pranav Iyengar.
Acting as a special consultant on this
episode was Manu Pillai, author of the
book Rebel Sultans: The Deccan from Khilji
to Shivaji. Manu's new book, False Allies,
about India's Maharajahs,
is available to buy now.
I'd like to thank my researchers on this
episode, Ciaran Falvey and Brian Stolk, and
I'd also like to thank my archival
researcher, Joe Macdonald, for rooting
through the archives in the British
Library for Colin Mackenzie's unpublished
account of his visit to Hampi.
Krishna Devaraya's Āmuktamālyada
was translated by Srinivas Reddy.
Joining us on this episode was the
virtuoso of Carnatic music, Aruna Sairam,
who recorded seven incredible tracks of
traditional Carnatic classical music,
including her own compositions
based on the poetry written by King
Krishna Devaraya. If you enjoyed these
tracks, they will be available to
download for all Patreon subscribers.
I love to hear your thoughts and
responses on Twitter, so please come and
tell me what you thought. You can follow
me at Paul MM Cooper, and if you'd like
updates about the podcast, announcements
about new episodes, as well as images,
maps, and reading suggestions, you can
follow the podcast @Fall_of_Civ_Pod,
with underscores separating the words.
This podcast can only keep going with
the support of our generous subscribers
on Patreon.
You keep me running, you help me cover my
costs, and you help keep the podcast
ad-free.
You also let me dedicate more time to
researching, writing, recording, and
editing to get the episodes out to you
faster and bring as much life and detail
to them as possible.
I want to thank all my subscribers for
making this happen.
If you enjoyed this episode, please
consider heading onto patreon.com/
fallofcivilizations_podcast,
or just Google Fall
of Civilizations Patreon.
For now, all the best, and thanks for
listening.